asian exporters fear damage from u.s.-japan rift
u.s. and japan has raised fears among many of asia's exporting
nations that the row could inflict far-reaching economic
they told reuter correspondents in asian capitals a u.s.
move against japan might boost protectionist sentiment in the
u.s. and lead to curbs on american imports of their products.
but some exporters said that while the conflict would hurt
them in the long-run, in the short-term tokyo's loss might be
the u.s. has said it will impose 300 mln dlrs of tariffs on
imports of japanese electronics goods on april 17, in
retaliation for japan's alleged failure to stick to a pact not
to sell semiconductors on world markets at below cost.
unofficial japanese estimates put the impact of the tariffs
at 10 billion dlrs and spokesmen for major electronics firms
said they would virtually halt exports of products hit by the
"we wouldn't be able to do business," said a spokesman for
leading japanese electronics firm matsushita electric
"if the tariffs remain in place for any length of time
beyond a few months it will mean the complete erosion of
exports (of goods subject to tariffs) to the u.s.," said tom
murtha, a stock analyst at the tokyo office of broker &lt;james
in taiwan, businessmen and officials are also worried.
"we are aware of the seriousness of the u.s. threat against
japan because it serves as a warning to us," said a senior
taiwanese trade official who asked not to be named.
taiwan had a trade trade surplus of 15.6 billion dlrs last
year, 95 pct of it with the u.s.
the surplus helped swell taiwan's foreign exchange reserves
to 53 billion dlrs, among the world's largest.
"we must quickly open our markets, remove trade barriers and
cut import tariffs to allow imports of u.s. products, if we
want to defuse problems from possible u.s. retaliation," said
paul sheen, chairman of textile exporters &lt;taiwan safe group>.
a senior official of south korea's trade promotion
association said the trade dispute between the u.s. and japan
might also lead to pressure on south korea, whose chief exports
are similar to those of japan.
last year south korea had a trade surplus of 7.1 billion
dlrs with the u.s., up from 4.9 billion dlrs in 1985.
in malaysia, trade officers and businessmen said tough
curbs against japan might allow hard-hit producers of
semiconductors in third countries to expand their sales to the
in hong kong, where newspapers have alleged japan has been
manufacturers share that view. but other businessmen said such
a short-term commercial advantage would be outweighed by
further u.s. pressure to block imports.
"that is a very short-term view," said lawrence mills,
director-general of the federation of hong kong industry.
"if the whole purpose is to prevent imports, one day it will
be extended to other sources. much more serious for hong kong
is the disadvantage of action restraining trade," he said.
the u.s. last year was hong kong's biggest export market,
accounting for over 30 pct of domestically produced exports.
the australian government is awaiting the outcome of trade
talks between the u.s. and japan with interest and concern,
industry minister john button said in canberra last friday.
"this kind of deterioration in trade relations between two
countries which are major trading partners of ours is a very
he said australia's concerns centred on coal and beef,
australia's two largest exports to japan and also significant
meanwhile u.s.-japanese diplomatic manoeuvres to solve the
japan's ruling liberal democratic party yesterday outlined
a package of economic measures to boost the japanese economy.
the measures proposed include a large supplementary budget
and record public works spending in the first half of the
they also call for stepped-up spending as an emergency
measure to stimulate the economy despite prime minister
yasuhiro nakasone's avowed fiscal reform program.
deputy u.s. trade representative michael smith and makoto
kuroda, japan's deputy minister of international trade and
industry (miti), are due to meet in washington this week in an
china daily says vermin eat 7-12 pct grain stocks
a survey of 19 provinces and seven cities
showed vermin consume between seven and 12 pct of china's grain
it also said that each year 1.575 mln tonnes, or 25 pct, of
china's fruit output are left to rot, and 2.1 mln tonnes, or up
to 30 pct, of its vegetables. the paper blamed the waste on
inadequate storage and bad preservation methods.
it said the government had launched a national programme to
reduce waste, calling for improved technology in storage and
preservation, and greater production of additives. the paper
japan to revise long-term energy demand downwards
the ministry of international trade and
industry (miti) will revise its long-term energy supply/demand
outlook by august to meet a forecast downtrend in japanese
miti is expected to lower the projection for primary energy
supplies in the year 2000 to 550 mln kilolitres (kl) from 600
the decision follows the emergence of structural changes in
japanese industry following the rise in the value of the yen
and a decline in domestic electric power demand.
miti is planning to work out a revised energy supply/demand
outlook through deliberations of committee meetings of the
agency of natural resources and energy, the officials said.
they said miti will also review the breakdown of energy
supply sources, including oil, nuclear, coal and natural gas.
nuclear energy provided the bulk of japan's electric power
in the fiscal year ended march 31, supplying an estimated 27
pct on a kilowatt/hour basis, followed by oil (23 pct) and
liquefied natural gas (21 pct), they noted.
thai trade deficit widens in first quarter
thailand's trade deficit widened to 4.5
billion baht in the first quarter of 1987 from 2.1 billion a
year ago, the business economics department said.
it said janunary/march imports rose to 65.1 billion baht
from 58.7 billion. thailand's improved business climate this
year resulted in a 27 pct increase in imports of raw materials
the country's oil import bill, however, fell 23 pct in the
first quarter due to lower oil prices.
the department said first quarter exports expanded to 60.6
export growth was smaller than expected due to lower
earnings from many key commodities including rice whose
earnings declined 18 pct, maize 66 pct, sugar 45 pct, tin 26
pct and canned pineapples seven pct.
products registering high export growth were jewellery up
64 pct, clothing 57 pct and rubber 35 pct.
indonesia sees cpo price rising sharply
indonesia expects crude palm oil (cpo)
prices to rise sharply to between 450 and 550 dlrs a tonne fob
sometime this year because of better european demand and a fall
in malaysian output, hasrul harahap, junior minister for tree
prices of malaysian and sumatran cpo are now around 332
dlrs a tonne cif for delivery in rotterdam, traders said.
harahap said indonesia would maintain its exports, despite
making recent palm oil purchases from malaysia, so that it
could possibly increase its international market share.
indonesia, the world's second largest producer of palm oil
after malaysia, has been forced to import palm oil to ensure
supplies during the moslem fasting month of ramadan.
harahap said it was better to import to cover a temporary
shortage than to lose export markets.
indonesian exports of cpo in calendar 1986 were 530,500
tonnes, against 468,500 in 1985, according to central bank
australian foreign ship ban ends but nsw ports hit
tug crews in new south wales (nsw),
victoria and western australia yesterday lifted their ban on
foreign-flag ships carrying containers but nsw ports are still
being disrupted by a separate dispute, shipping sources said.
the ban, imposed a week ago over a pay claim, had prevented
the movement in or out of port of nearly 20 vessels, they said.
the pay dispute went before a hearing of the arbitration
meanwhile, disruption began today to cargo handling in the
ports of sydney, newcastle and port kembla, they said.
the industrial action at the nsw ports is part of the week
of action called by the nsw trades and labour council to
protest changes to the state's workers' compensation laws.
the shipping sources said the various port unions appear to
be taking it in turn to work for a short time at the start of
each shift and then to walk off.
cargo handling in the ports has been disrupted, with
container movements most affected, but has not stopped
they said they could not say how long the disruption will
go on and what effect it will have on shipping movements.
likely to start trading in at least one new commodity, and
possibly two, during calendar 1987, exchange chairman paian
he told reuters in a telephone interview that trading in
palm oil, sawn timber, pepper or tobacco was being considered.
trading in either crude palm oil (cpo) or refined palm oil
may also be introduced. but he said the question was still
being considered by trade minister rachmat saleh and no
decision on when to go ahead had been made.
the fledgling exchange currently trades coffee and rubber
physicals on an open outcry system four days a week.
"several factors make us move cautiously," nainggolan said.
"we want to move slowly and safely so that we do not make a
mistake and undermine confidence in the exchange."
physical rubber trading was launched in 1985, with coffee
added in january 1986. rubber contracts are traded fob, up to
five months forward. robusta coffee grades four and five are
traded for prompt delivery and up to five months forward,
the trade ministry and exchange board are considering the
introduction of futures trading later for rubber, but one
official said a feasibility study was needed first. no
decisions are likely until after indonesia's elections on april
trade minister saleh said on monday that indonesia, as the
world's second largest producer of natural rubber, should
expand its rubber marketing effort and he hoped development of
nainggolan said that the exchange was trying to boost
overseas interest by building up contacts with end-users.
he said teams had already been to south korea and taiwan to
encourage direct use of the exchange, while a delegation would
also visit europe, mexico and some latin american states to
officials say the infant exchange has made a good start
although trading in coffee has been disappointing.
transactions in rubber between the start of trading in
april 1985 and december 1986 totalled 9,595 tonnes, worth 6.9
mln dlrs fob, plus 184.3 mln rupiah for rubber delivered
locally, the latest exchange report said.
trading in coffee in calendar 1986 amounted to only 1,905
tonnes in 381 lots, valued at 6.87 billion rupiah.
total membership of the exchange is now nine brokers and
sri lanka gets usda approval for wheat price
food department officials said the u.s.
department of agriculture approved the continental grain co
sale of 52,500 tonnes of soft wheat at 89 u.s. dlrs a tonne c
and f from pacific northwest to colombo.
they said the shipment was for april 8 to 20 delivery.
western mining to open new gold mine in australia
&lt;wmng.s> (wmc) said it will establish a new joint venture gold
mine in the northern territory at a cost of about 21 mln dlrs.
the mine, to be known as the goodall project, will be owned
60 pct by wmc and 40 pct by a local w.r. grace and co &lt;gra>
unit. it is located 30 kms east of the adelaide river at mt.
bundey, wmc said in a statement
it said the open-pit mine, with a conventional leach
treatment plant, is expected to produce about 50,000 ounces of
gold in its first year of production from mid-1988. annual ore
capacity will be about 750,000 tonnes.
sumitomo bank aims at quick recovery from merger
sumitomo bank ltd &lt;sumi.t> is certain to
lose its status as japan's most profitable bank as a result of
its merger with the heiwa sogo bank, financial analysts said.
osaka-based sumitomo, with desposits of around 23.9
trillion yen, merged with heiwa sogo, a small, struggling bank
with an estimated 1.29 billion dlrs in unrecoverable loans, in
but despite the link-up, sumitomo president koh komatsu
told reuters he is confident his bank can quickly regain its
"we'll be back in position in first place within three
years," komatsu said in an interview.
he said that while the merger will initially reduce
sumitomo's profitability and efficiency, it will vastly expand
sumitomo's branch network in the tokyo metropolitan area where
but financial analysts are divided on whether and how
quickly the gamble will pay off.
some said sumitomo may have paid too much for heiwa sogo in
view of the smaller bank's large debts. others argue the merger
was more cost effective than creating a comparable branch
the analysts agreed the bank was aggressive. it has
expanded overseas, entered the lucrative securities business
and geared up for domestic competition, but they questioned the
wisdom of some of those moves.
"they've made bold moves to put everything in place. now
it's largely out of their hands," said kleinwort benson ltd
among sumitomo's problems are limits placed on its move to
enter u.s. securities business by taking a share in american
investment bank goldman, sachs and co.
sumitomo last august agreed to pay 500 mln dlrs for a 12.5
pct limited partnership in the bank, but for the time being at
least, the federal reserve board has forbidden them to exchange
personnel, or increase the business they do with each other.
"the tie-up is widely looked on as a lame duck because the
fed was stricter than sumitomo expected," said one analyst.
but komatsu said the move will pay off in time.
"u.s. regulations will change in the near future and if so,
we can do various things. we only have to wait two or three
years, not until the 21st century," komatsu said.
komatsu is also willing to be patient about possible routes
into the securities business at home.
article 65 of the securities and exchange act, japan's
version of the u.s. glass-steagall act, separates commercial
but the walls between the two are crumbling and komatsu
said he hopes further deregulation will create new
"we need to find new business chances," komatsu said. "in some
cases these will be securities related, in some cases trust
bank related. that's the kind of deregulation we want."
until such changes occur, sumitomo will focus on such
domestic securities business as profitable government bond
dealing and strengthening relations with meiko securities co
ltd, in which it holds a five pct share, komatsu said.
he said sumitomo is cautiously optimistic about entering
the securities business here through its swiss universal bank
the finance ministry is expected to grant licences to
securities subsidiaries of u.s. commercial banks soon,
following a similar decision for subsidiaries of european
universal banks in which the parent holds a less than 50 pct.
but komatsu is reluctant to push hard for a similar
"we don't want to make waves. we expect this will be allowed
in two or three years," he said.
like other city banks, sumitomo is also pushing to expand
lending to individuals and small and medium businesses to
replace disappearing demand from big business, he added.
the analysts said sumitomo will have to devote a lot of
time to digesting its most recent initiatives, including the
"it's (sumitomo) been bold in its strategies," said
"after that, it's a question of absorbing and juggling
around. it will be the next decade before we see if the
subroto says indonesia supports tin pact extension
confirmed indonesian support for an extension of the sixth
international tin agreement (ita), but said a new pact was not
asked by reuters to clarify his statement on monday in
which he said the pact should be allowed to lapse, subroto said
indonesia was ready to back extension of the ita.
"we can support extension of the sixth agreement," he said.
"but a seventh accord we believe to be unnecessary."
the sixth ita will expire at the end of june unless a
two-thirds majority of members vote for an extension.
bundesbank allocates 6.1 billion marks in tender
the bundesbank accepted bids for 6.1
billion marks at today's tender for a 28-day securities
repurchase pact at a fixed rate of 3.80 pct, a central bank
banks, which bid for a total 12.2 billion marks liquidity,
will be credited with the funds allocated today and must buy
back securities pledged on may 6.
some 14.9 billion marks will drain from the market today as
an earlier pact expires, so the bundesbank is effectively
withdrawing a net 8.1 billion marks from the market with
a bundesbank spokesman said in answer to enquiries that the
withdrawal of funds did not reflect a tightening of credit
policy, but was to be seen in the context of plentiful
banks held an average 59.3 billion marks at the bundesbank
over the first six days of the month, well clear of the likely
april minimum reserve requirement of 51 billion marks.
the bundesbank spokesman noted that by bidding only 12.2
billion marks, below the outgoing 14.9 billion, banks
themselves had shown they felt they had plenty of liquidity.
dealers said the bundesbank is keen to prevent too much
liquidity accruing in the market, as that would blunt the
effectiveness of the security repurchase agreement, its main
open-market instrument for steering market interest rates. two
further pacts are likely this month over the next two weeks.
the bundesbank is currently steering call money between 3.6
and 3.8 pct, although short-term fluctuations outside that
bond corp still considering atlas mining bail-out
bond corp holdings ltd &lt;bona.s> and atlas
consolidated mining and development corp &lt;atlc.mn> are still
holding talks on a bail-out package for the troubled mining
atlas, the philippines' biggest copper producer, said it
had been hit by depressed world copper prices. it reported a
net loss of 976.38 mln pesos in the year ending december 1986,
compared with a net loss of 1.53 billion in 1985.
the company said it had been able to cut its losses because
its scaled-down copper operations in the central island of cebu
started in the second half of 1986.
atlas said negotiations were continuing on the acquisition
by bond of the company's existing bank loans and their
a memorandum of understanding signed by the two sides in
october last year said bond would acquire atlas' total loans of
275 mln dlrs, to be repaid by the mining company in gold.
atlas said the two sides were also discussing equity
infusion into atlas and the creation of a development fund for
further exploration and development of the company's gold
properties in the central province of masbate.
wilson banks, general manager of &lt;bond corp international
ltd> in hong kong, told reuters the atlas statement on the
banks said bond corp was seriously considering several
investments in the philippines but did not give details.
in its statement, atlas said development of the pre-world
war two underground mines in masbate had been accelerated and
the ore tonnage had increased, extending the operation's life
china industrial output rises in first quarter
china's industrial output rose 14.1 pct
in the first quarter of 1987 against the same 1986 period, the
its overseas edition said the growth rate, which compares
with a target of seven pct for the whole of 1987, was "rather
high" but the base in the first quarter of 1986 was on the low
side. industrial output grew 4.4 pct in the first quarter of
it said china's industrial production this year has been
normal but product quality and efficiency need further
improvement. it gave no further details.
japan ministry says open farm trade would hit u.s.
u.s. demands that japan open its farm products market, will
tell u.s. officials at talks later this month that
liberalisation would harm existing u.s. farm exports to japan,
"imports from the u.s. would drop due to active sales drives
by other suppliers," the official, who declined to be named,
said. "japan is the largest customer for u.s. farm products and
it is not reasonable for the u.s. to demand japan liberalise
its farm import market," he said.
agriculture minister mutsuki kato has said if the u.s.
insists japan open its protected rice market it will also open
its wheat market, where volume and origin are regulated to
australia and canada could then increase their wheat
exports as they are more competitive than the u.s., he said.
end-users would also buy other origins, grain traders said.
u.s. agriculture secretary richard lyng, who is due to
visit japan for talks between april 16-27, has said he will ask
japan to offer a share of its rice market to u.s. suppliers and
remove quotas on u.s. beef and citrus imports.
other countries are already cutting into the u.s. market
share here. australia, the largest beef supplier to japan, has
been trying to boost exports prior to the expiry of a four-year
imports of u.s. corn have fallen due to increased sales
from china and south america, while japanese soybean imports
from brazil are expected to rise sharply this year, although
the u.s. will remain the largest supplier.
u.s. feedgrain sales will also drop if japan opens up its
beef imports, since japan depends almost entirely on feedgrain
imports, mainly from the u.s., japanese officials said.
an indication of the u.s. position came last december when
under secretary of agriculture daniel amstutz said japan has
the potential to provide one of the largest boosts to u.s.
agricultural exports, with the beef market alone representing
some one billion dlrs in new business.
the u.s. has also asked the general agreement on tariffs
and trade to investigate the legality of japanese import
controls on 12 other farm products, including fruit juices,
purees and pulp, tomato juice, ketchup and sauce, peanuts,
prepared beef products and miscellaneous beans.
to help calm heated trade relations with the u.s., japan's
top business group keidanren has urged the government to remove
residual import restrictions on agricultural products.
but agriculture minister kato has ruled out any emotional
reaction, and the senior ministry official said the farm issue
should not become a scapegoat for trade pressure in the
"japan is the largest buyer of u.s. farm products, and these
issues should not be discussed on the same table," the official
amatil proposes two-for-five bonus share issue
amatil ltd &lt;amaa.s> said it proposes to
make a two-for-five bonus issue out of its revaluation reserve
shareholders will be asked to approve the issue and an
increase in authorised capital to 175 mln shares from 125 mln
at a general meeting on may 1, it said in a statement.
the new shares will rank for dividends declared after
october 31. amatil, in which b.a.t. industries plc &lt;bti.l>
holds a 41 pct stake, said it does not expect to maintain its
latest annual dividend rate of 29 cents a share on the enlarged
bowater 1986 pretax profits rise 15.6 mln stg
div 6.0p vs 5.5p making 10.0p vs 9.25p
turnover 1.34 billion stg vs 1.29 billion
pretax profit 48.0 mln vs 32.4 mln
tax 14.4 mln vs 6.9 mln
company name is bowater industries plc &lt;bwtr.l>
trading profit 63.4 mln vs 45.1 mln
packaging and associated products 23.2 mln vs 14.2 mln
merchanting and services 18.4 mln vs 9.6 mln
tissue and timber products 9.0 mln vs 5.8 mln
interest debit 15.4 mln vs 12.7 mln
minority interests 7.0 mln debit vs 6.2 mln debit
extraordinary items 15.4 mln credit vs 11.9 mln debit
u.k. money market deficit forecast at 250 mln stg
the bank of england said it forecast a
shortage of around 250 mln stg in the money market today.
among the main factors affecting liquidity, bills maturing
in official hands and the take-up of treasury bills will drain
some 505 mln stg, while bills for repurchase by the market will
remove around 194 mln. in addition, a rise in note circulation
and bankers' balances below target will each drain around 110
partly offsetting these outflows, exchequer transactions
will add some 690 mln stg to the system today.
south korea moves to slow growth of trade surplus
south korea's trade surplus is growing too
fast and the government has started taking steps to slow it
down, deputy prime minister kim mahn-je said.
he told a press conference the government planned to
increase investment, speed up the opening of the local market
to foreign imports and gradually adjust its currency to hold
the surplus "at a proper level."
but he said the government would not allow the won to
appreciate too much in a short period of time. south korea has
been under pressure from washington to revalue the won.
the u.s. wants south korea to cut its trade surplus with
the u.s., which rose to 7.4 billion dlrs in 1986 from 4.3
kim, who is also economic planning minister, said prospects
were bright for the south korean economy, but the government
would try to hold the current account surplus to around five
billion dlrs a year for the next five years.
"our government projections of eight pct gnp growth, five
billion dlrs of (current account) surplus and 12 pct growth in
exports all seemed to be reasonable early this year. but now
the surplus is growing faster than we expected," he said.
trade ministry officials said south korea's exports rose 35
pct to 9.34 billion dlrs in the first three months of this
year, while imports rose only 8.5 pct to 8.2 billion dlrs.
kim said the swing of south korea's current account to a
surplus of 4.65 billion dlrs in 1986 from an 890 mln dlr
deficit in 1985 was very significant. the surplus enabled the
country to reduce its foreign debt last year for the first
south korea's foreign debt, which fell to 44.5 billion dlrs
in 1986 from 46.8 billion in 1985, is still among the largest
"this huge amount of our foreign debt has been one of the
major constraints on our development... last year was a major
turning point for the korean economy," kim said.
kim said his government plannned to reduce the ratio of
foreign debt to the country's gnp to about 20 pct in 1991, from
"the government, however, does not want to accelerate
reducing the debt by making an excessive trade surplus," he
kim said a sudden rise in the surplus would cause inflation
and lead to trade friction with seoul's major trading partners,
"we need a surplus because we have to reduce our debt, but
we are taking measures to hold the size of the surplus at a
finns and canadians to study mtbe production plant
finland's national oil company neste oy
&lt;neoy.he> said in a statement it had agreed with canadian firms
to study the feasibility of building a plant in edmonton,
canada, to produce a replacement for lead in petrol.
the prospective plant would cost an estimated 270 mln
canadian dlrs and would produce methyl tertiary butyl ether
(mtbe) from raw materials available locally, it said.
the partners in the study are neste oy, celanese canada
inc, hoechst celanese corporation and trade mountain pipe line
the edmonton site was suitable because of the raw materials
availability, the proximity to pipeline transportation and the
important capital and operating advantages gained by locating
on an existing celanese canada site, the statement said.
the partners would look into the feasibility of a plant
producing 500,000 tonnes per annum of mtbe, an octane enhancer
that can replace tetra ethyl lead.
most of the mtbe would be targeted for the united states
where lead levels in gasoline are being lowered because of
canadian lead limits are currently 11 times as high as the
u.s. limit but lead is scheduled for virtual elimination in
canada by 1993, which should create a canadian demand for mtbe,
finland's neste oy, whose turnover last year was over five
billion dlrs, has extensive experience with mtbe. it has a
major investment in an mtbe plant in saudi arabia.
the edmonton, alberta plant would be scheduled to go on
stream in late 1989, the statement said.
cra sold forrest gold for 76 mln dlrs - whim creek
&lt;whim creek consolidated nl> said the
consortium it is leading will pay 76.55 mln dlrs for the
acquisition of cra ltd's &lt;craa.s> &lt;forrest gold pty ltd> unit,
cra and whim creek did not disclose the price yesterday.
whim creek will hold 44 pct of the consortium, while
&lt;austwhim resources nl> will hold 27 pct and &lt;croesus mining
nl> 29 pct, it said in a statement.
as reported, forrest gold owns two mines in western
australia producing a combined 37,000 ounces of gold a year. it
also owns an undeveloped gold project.
the number of workers employed in
the west german industrial sector stagnated in the last quarter
of 1986 as a 50,000 increase in overall employment benefited
only the services branch, the diw economic institute said.
a diw report added the general downturn in the economy
since last autumn had had a negative effect on the willingness
of firms to take on workers. it referred to a marked downturn
in the number of workers taken on in the capital goods sector.
new orders for manufacturing industry goods have mostly
fallen or stagnated in recent months, but data for february
finally showed a reversal of the trend, with a 1.9 pct rise.
pretax profits of 48.0 mln stg exceeded market expectations of
around 40 mln and pushed the company's shares up sharply to a
high of 491p from 468p last night, dealers said.
the shares later eased back to 481p. bowater reported a
32.4 mln stg profit in 1985.
the company said in a statement accompanying the results
that the underlying trend showed improvement and it intended to
expand further by developing existing businesses and seeking
it added that it had appointed david lyon, currently
managing director of redland plc &lt;rdld.l> as its new chief
analysts noted that bowater's profits of 18.9 mln stg from
13.2 mln previously had been given a boost by pension benefits
profit from australia and the far east showed the greatest
percentage rise, jumping 55.0 pct to 15.5 mln from 10.0 mln,
while the profit from u.k. operations rose 30.7 pct to 24.7
mln, and europe, 42.9 pct to 11.0 mln.
citibank norway unit loses six mln crowns in 1986
subsidiary of the u.s.-based bank, said it made a net loss of
just over six mln crowns in 1986 -- although foreign bankers
said they expect it to show 1987 profits after two lean years.
citibank's oslo treasury head bjoern sejerstad told
reuters, citibank, one of seven foreign bank subsidiaries
operating in norway, lost money because of restructuring for
investment banking away from commercial banking and an economic
slump in norway following last year's plunge in oil prices.
foreign banks have been allowed to operate susbidiaries in
foreign banking analysts in oslo said access to norway's
second-hand securities and equities markets, to be approved
later this spring, and lower primary reserve requirements would
citibank lost 490,000 crowns in norway in 1985, but
sejerstad said a profit was likely this year because of planned
liberalisation and better economic performance, helped by a
steadier oil price of around 18 dlrs a barrel.
earlier this year, chase manhattan bank's &lt;cmb.n>
subsidiary decided to stop foreign exchange trading after heavy
losses and focus instead on fee-based merchant banking.
vieille montagne says 1986 conditions unfavourable
a sharp fall in the dollar price of
zinc and the depreciation of the u.s. currency created
unfavourable economic conditions for vieille montagne sa
it said in a statement that the two factors led to a
squeeze on refining margins and an 18.24 pct fall in sales and
services income despite an unchanged level of activity.
vieille montagne, which is actively pursuing a
restructuring program, reported a 198 mln franc net loss, after
187 mln francs in provisions for the closure of an electrolysis
plant, compared with a 250 mln franc net profit in 1985.
vieille montagne reports loss, dividend nil
net loss after exceptional charges 198 mln francs vs profit
exceptional provisions for closure of viviez electrolysis
plant 187 mln francs vs exceptional gain 22 mln
sales and services 16.51 billion francs vs 20.20 billion
proposed net dividend on ordinary shares nil vs 110 francs
company's full name is vieille montagne sa &lt;vmnb.br>.
ec mainly for tin extension, no u.k. stand taken
european community (ec) members of the
international tin council, except britain, have said they are
prepared to back an extension of the international tin
he said at a meeting of ec states' representatives here
yesterday, britain undertook to communicate its own decision to
its partners today. it said it was not ready yesterday to take
a stand but did not say why.
he added nine other ec states backed an extension. spain
and portugal, which are not members of the international tin
council, raised no objections to a common ec stance in favour.
japan given little hope of avoiding u.s. sanctions
a top u.s. official said japan has little
chance of convincing the u.s. to drop threatened trade
sanctions, despite the efforts of a japanese team that left for
michael armacost, under secretary of state for political
affairs, was asked at a press conference whether japan's moves
to boost its domestic economy and open its markets could
persuade the u.s. not to impose tariffs on japanese imports
said, and replied: "...it is probably too early for the figures
to demonstrate that the situation has turned around and to
permit the result you have described."
armacost said the u.s. hopes japan will take steps to lift
its domestic economy and reduce dependence on exports, remove
barriers to imports and settle outstanding trade issues.
"there are obvious problems at the moment in the trade area,
but we do not wish those problems to divert attention from
important areas of cooperation that continue to exist on
security and political issues," he said.
"the question is whether through cooperative actions between
our governments we can reduce the (trade) imbalance or whether
congress takes action to reduce it through protectionist
thai zinc exports fall in march
thai zinc ingot exports fell to 882
tonnes in march from 1,764 in february and 3,008 in march 1986,
a spokesman for padaeng industry co ltd, the country's sole
exporter, attributed the decline to the company's lower stocks,
which averaged 5,000 tonnes in the first quarter against 16,000
tonnes in late 1985 when it began exporting.
the department said major buyers included china, japan, the
philippines, south korea, singapore and taiwan.
thailand exported 4,842 tonnes of zinc ingots during the
first quarter, down from 14,937 a year ago.
ec sugar tender hard to predict - london trade
the outcome of today's european community
(ec) white sugar tender is extremely difficult to predict after
last week's substantial award of 102,350 tonnes at the highest
ever rebate of 46.864 european currency units (ecus) per 100
some said they believed the tonnage would probably be
smaller, at around 60,000 tonnes, but declined to give a view
on the likely restitution. last week, the european commission
accepted 785,000 tonnes of sugar into intervention by operators
protesting about low rebates. this might be a determining
factor in today's result, they added.
north yemen calls sugar buying tender - trade
north yemen has called a buying tender
for saturday for the purchase of 30,000 tonnes of white sugar
for arrival in june, traders said.
anheuser-busch joins bid for san miguel
joined several other foreign bidders for sequestered shares of
the philippines' largest food and beverage maker san miguel
corp &lt;sanm.mn>, the head of a government panel which controls
ramon diaz, secretary of the presidential commission on
good government (pcgg), said anheuser-busch had told the
government it was interested in buying 14 mln "b" shares of san
miguel. he did not disclose the offered price.
diaz said australian brewer alan bond's bond corp holdings
ltd had offered 150 pesos per share for the "b" shares.
diaz said new york investment bank allen and co inc had
earlier said it was interested in buying all 38.1 mln
sequestered shares. he told reuters last month elders ixl ltd
&lt;elxa.s>, the melbourne-based brewing company, had also bid for
the hong kong economic journal last month quoted a
spokesman of australian stock broker jacksons ltd as saying
that &lt;barwon farmlands ltd>, an australian firm owned 30 pct by
&lt;ariadne australia ltd>, was planning a filipino branch in
order to buy the entire block of 38.1 mln shares.
anheuser-busch last year made a 150 mln dlr bid to buy &lt;san
miguel brewery ltd>, a hong kong listed company which is 69.65
pct owned by &lt;neptunia corp ltd>, a san miguel corp subsidiary.
the talks broke down last june after the two sides said
they could not agree on the terms of the sale.
economic spotlight - australian markets booming
australian markets are booming as foreign
fund managers redirect capital away from the united states and
high short-term interest rates, a bullish stock market and
an increasingly stable currency reflect a massive inflow of
fresh funds in the last two months, largely from japanese and
u.s. investors, analysts polled by reuters said.
fund managers want quality markets to park their cash in
and have settled on australia, britain and canada as they
diversify from volatile u.s. dollar instruments, they said.
a one percentage point fall in key 10-year bonds rates in
the past month, record share prices and a 10-month high for the
currency of 0.71 u.s. dlrs all illustrated the inflow.
official figures on the latest inflow of investment capital
are not available, but brokers said they received almost daily
inquiries from japan and the united states.
"these people have got trillions of dollars sloshing about
and they don't know what to do with it. some of that is ending
up here with the attraction of high interest rates and
reasonable currency stability," national australia bank ltd
"there is a 'flight to quality'," hamley said. "australia may
not be in the best (economic) position, but there aren't too
many other countries where you'd want to put your money."
the stronger australian dollar was also attracting
investors taking advantage of an appreciating currency against
the volatility of the u.s. unit, analysts said.
"we're looking a more favoured market than perhaps the u.s.
where some people would be concerned about the value of the
u.s. dollar," lloyds bank nza ltd chief economist will buttrose
said. "why not put the money in australia where entry is cheap
but turning that capital into more permanent productive
investment depends on government economic policy, he said.
"it will only disappear if people lose confidence in the
direction in the economy," buttrose said, adding that offshore
investors would carefully watch the government's promised tough
while happy to invest in bonds and other vehicles yielding
interest unobtainable elsewhere, fund managers could just as
easily reverse the flow -- particularly the japanese, who were
badly hurt in the past by rapid falls in the australian dollar
and hefty jumps in bond rates, analysts said.
"it will remain very edgy money. if something was not to be
delivered, if the statement wasn't considered tough enough, one
might see a substantial outflow," buttrose said.
offshore investors are eager to see australia take tough
economic decisions to curb its 100 billion dlr foreign debt and
stubborn current account deficit, analysts said.
"they are giving us the benefit of the doubt and i think
they would like to leave the money here," buttrose said.
reserve bank policy has also reflected the increased
interest in investment in australia and the need to shield
japanese investors from rapid currency fluctuations.
reserve governor bob johnston last week acknowledged an
element of targeting the rate against the yen in currency
policy when he said authorities could not take their "eyes off
the yen" because of the crucial role of japanese investors.
analysts said they believed the reserve bank had worked
successfully in recent months to keep the australian dollar
within the range of 100 to 103 yen.
apart from its recovery against a weak u.s. dollar, the
australian dollar has also risen almost three pct on a
trade-weighted basis in the last three weeks.
offshore buying has also played a role in the booming
australian share market. it has followed wall street and other
markets, but is also setting its own trend in response to the
weight of both domestic and offshore funds pouring into
equities, particularly in the gold sector.
the key all ordinaries index rose to a record 1,758.3
today, nearly 20 pct above its level at the end of 1986, while
the gold index has nearly doubled to a record 3,081.0 in the
the property sector is also sought after, with japanese
companies that have invested heavily in the united states in
recent years turning their attention to undervalued real
estate, particularly in the tourism field.
analysts pointed to the recent sale of sydney's five-star
regent hotel to japanese interests for more than 145 mln dlrs
as indicative of the type of property being sought.
"they think they find good value real estate here which,
with long term and fixed capital investment, is the kind of
economy has started to pull out of a nosedive but oil prices
will determine the pace of recovery, bankers and economists
crucial will be the ability of the 13-member opec to hold
oil prices around a new benchmark of 18 dlrs a barrel in the
northern hemisphere summer when demand usually slackens.
bankers estimate the economy, measured in terms of gross
domestic product (gdp), shrank 19 pct in real terms last year
after contracting 8.1 pct the year before.
this was after taking into account inflation in consumer
prices of 1.5 pct in 1985, slowing to 1.0 pct in 1986.
factors depressing economic activity include the
6-1/2-year-old iran-iraq war on kuwait's doorstep, which
threatens the emirate's vital oil export lifeline through the
gulf and has sapped business confidence.
but sentiment received a much-needed boost in september
when, after a series of piecemeal steps to combat a debt crisis
caused by the 1982 crash of local stock market, a comprehensive
new debt settlement program was introduced.
the share crash, result of a speculative spree in forward
trading, left 95 billion dlrs of post-dated cheques in default.
the cheques were also used as collateral for consumer
spending, thus generating an informal credit system.
much of the debt has been watered down but big sums are
still owed by individuals and companies.
there was some 4.4 billion dinars (about 15.7 billion dlrs)
in outstanding bank credit at the end of 1986, of which
one-quarter to one-third was estimated by bankers to rank as
bad or doubtful debt. but the government has repeatedly said it
will not allow any banks to go under.
the new debt settlement scheme entails a rescheduling of
problem credit over 10 to 15 years, depending on whether
debtors have regular cash flows or not.
banks' shareholders and depositors will have their rights
guaranteed by the government -- an edict of vital significance
in a country of only 1.7 mln people where the financial sector
kuwait is better placed than any other opec country to ride
out the oil glut, bankers and economists say.
kuwait has an opec quota of 948,000 barrels per day (bpd)
compared with production capacity of 4.0 mln bpd mentioned last
year by oil minister sheikh ali al-khalifa al-sabah.
but strategic diversification into downstream operations in
europe several years ago and a hefty refining investment at
home gives it guaranteed markets abroad and enables it to sell
over one-half of its output as high-grade refined oil products.
oil industry sources say kuwait is able to get an average
2.00 dlrs a barrel more by selling oil in the form of processed
product such as gas oil, kerosene and naphtha, rather than as
bankers say the rebound in oil prices is the major reason
for cautious optimism. other reasons are low domestic
inflation, a bottoming out of the fall in imports in recent
years and signs government spending on productive sectors will
external accounts are in good shape, with an estimated 1.8
billion dinar current account surplus in 1986, 16 pct below
that for 1985, but still an achievement in the recession-hit
kuwait's petrodollar reserves in mid-1986 were put
officially at over 80 billion dlrs, earning investment income
of the equivalent of about 3.65 billion dlrs a year.
but for the first time since the end of the oil boom, these
reserves may not be enough to prevent a "real" budget deficit for
the 1986/87 fiscal year ending june 30, bankers say.
in a budget portrayed by bankers as mildly contractionary,
revenues for 1986/87 were cut 38.6 pct and spending 11 pct,
doubling the nominal deficit to 1.33 billion dinars.
this left out income from state reserves, usually excluded
in official budget accounting, which are forecast by bankers at
up to 1.0 billion dinars in 1986/87, resulting in some
bankers say it is too early to venture a forecast for
economic growth this year or next.
"it depends on oil prices," one said. "this summer is
cabinet affairs minister rashid al-rashid said last sunday
the cabinet has ratified recommendations to rationalise state
spending in favour of productive sectors and reactivate the
he gave no details but bankers say these are expected to be
spelled out in the 1987/88 budget, possibly in june.
malaysia may not meet 1987 oil palm target
malaysia is unlikely to meet its
targeted output of five mln tonnes of oil palm in calendar
1987, oil palm growers told reuters.
output in 1987 is expected to reach around 4.5 mln tonnes,
unchanged from 1986, because of drought, low use of fertiliser
the growers were asked for their reaction to an oil world
newsletter report that malaysia's oil palm output is likely to
palm oil now sells at around 700 ringgit a tonne, or about
115 ringgit less than soybean oil, but malaysia must sell more
palm oil to prevent a stock buildup that could damage the
industry, a leading grower told reuters.
the country's palm oil stocks now total some 500,000 tonnes
against about 800,000 last march, the growers said.
the growers expect palm oil prices to ease later this year
due to pressure from south american and u.s. soybean output.
the current south american oilseed harvest, mainly soybean,
is likely to be around 25.7 mln tonnes against the previous
21.7 mln tonne crop, they said.
in addition, new u.s. soybean plantings are also expected
to enter the market around november when malaysian palm oil
they said new planting of palms is also likely to slow,
with some 50,000 hectares expected to be planted with new trees
against 100,000 in 1986, although the effects of this reduction
will not be felt for about another three years.
jardine matheson said it sets two-for-five bonus issue replacing "b" shares
jardine matheson said it sets two-for-five bonus issue replacing "b" shares
monier says britain's redland may bid for it
monier ltd &lt;mnra.s> said talks are taking place which may lead
to britain's redland plc &lt;rdld.l> making an offer for the
monier shares it does not already hold, chairman bill locke
redland already holds about 49 pct of monier's 156.28 mln
issued shares, he said in a brief notice to the australian
locke said shareholders would be advised as soon as the
discussions progressed and recommended that they keep their
monier shares were trading at a 1987 high of 3.10 dlrs
today, up from the previous peak of 2.80 at yesterday's close,
and well above the 1987 low of 2.18 dlrs.
monier is the largest concrete roof tile manufacturer in
australia, the u.s. and new zealand and the world's largest
marketer of fly ash, according to its annual report for 1985/86
it recently reported first-half 1986/87 net fell to 15.02
mln dlrs from 17.09 mln a year earlier due to the australian
housing downturn, although foreign earnings rose.
isuzu motor ltd &lt;isum.t> will pay no
dividend for the first half year ending april 30, 1987, as the
company is expected to mark a 12 billion yen parent company
current loss in the first half due to slow exports caused by
the yen's appreciation, a company spokesman said.
the company has paid no dividend since the year ended
october 31, 1983, when it paid five yen.
it had a 4.44 billion yen current profit in the first half
japanese official takes data to microchip talks
industry (miti) vice minister makoto kuroda leaves for
washington today with data he hopes will refute u.s. charges
japan has violated a pact on microchip trade.
a three-man japanese trade team is already in washington
laying the groundwork for talks between kuroda and deputy u.s.
trade representative michael smith aimed at persuading the u.s.
not to impose tariffs on certain japanese products.
but kuroda said he is taking no new proposals. "i have
nothing in my briefcase except an explanation of the current
situation," kuroda told the daily newspaper asahi shimbun.
kuroda said the u.s. decision was based on incorrect data
and an exaggerated sense of miti's power to control market
forces. "the u.s. has excessive expectations. to stabilise
supply-demand relations which have been disrupted by excess
inventories since 1985 will take some time," he said.
kuroda also laid part of the blame for low u.s. chip sales
in japan on a lack of effort by american firms here.
he said if he fails in talks tomorrow and friday to
forestall sanctions, he will seek further talks with u.s. trade
representative clayton yeutter. u.s. officials said this week's
talks are unlikely to delay imposition of tariffs.
bell group confirms standard chartered stake
the bell group ltd &lt;blla.s> said it now
holds 14.9 pct of the issued capital of standard chartered plc
the one-sentence statement from bell's headquarters
confirmed what its brokers warburg securities told reuters in
bell previously held 10 pct of standard.
bell chairman robert holmes a court, who is also a director
of standard, was not available for comment on his company's
intentions in boosting its holding and other company officials
contacted here by reuters declined to comment.
nippon steel denies china seeking japanese plants
nippon steel corp &lt;nstc.t> denied local
newspaper reports that china has been seeking to buy steel
plants from japanese firms which plan to suspend output under
the mainichi shimbun quoted nippon steel as saying that
china's state planning commission and some chinese firms have
asked japanese makers to sell them steel works and rolling
mills to expand steelmaking cheaply. it named no sources.
a nippon steel spokesman told reuters that china has made
no such official request, and the company was not considering
but mainichi quoted nippon steel officials as saying if
prices are reasonable, they would export their used mills to
the paper said china's crude steel output totalled 52 mln
tonnes in calendar 1986 and that it plans to increase to 80 mln
japan's steel industry rationalisation plan is aimed at
cutting production capacity sharply over the next few years.
jardine matheson replaces "b" share by bonus issue
&lt;jard.hk> said it will withdraw the previously announced
four-for-one bonus issue of "b" shares and replace it by a
two-for-five bonus issue of ordinary shares.
a statement said the firm expects to pay total dividends
for 1987 of not less than 40 cents a share on the expanded
jardine matheson decided to withdraw its issue because of a
joint announcement earlier today by ronald li, chairman of the
stock exchange of hong kong, and securities commissioner ray
astin, that the listings of new "b" shares would be barred.
the official announcement said this will include the
but the jardine statement quoted chairman simon keswick as
saying: "we continue to believe that the issuing of "b" shares
would benefit shareholders, and regret that they will not be
given the opportunity to vote on the matter at this stage."
keswick said the "b" share issue will benefit jardine
matheson's shareholders by giving the firm flexibility to issue
ordinary shares for expansion in future without diluting
however, he added: "we certainly welcome (the secretary for
monetary affairs) david nendick's referral of this very
important matter to the standing committee on company law
reform and are hopeful that the process will lead to the
development of general principles which can be embraced by all
constituents of the hong kong market."
japan given little hope of avoiding u.s. sanctions
a top u.s. official said japan has little
chance of persuading the u.s. to drop threatened trade
sanctions, despite the efforts of a japanese team that left for
michael armacost, under secretary of state for political
affairs, was asked at a press conference whether japan's moves
to boost its domestic economy and open its markets could
persuade the u.s. not to impose tariffs on japanese imports
said, and replied: "...it is probably too early for the figures
to demonstrate that the situation has turned around and to
permit the result you have described."
armacost said the u.s. hopes japan will take steps to lift
its domestic economy and reduce dependence on exports, remove
barriers to imports and settle outstanding trade issues.
"there are obvious problems at the moment in the trade area,
but we do not wish those problems to divert attention from
important areas of cooperation that continue to exist on
security and political issues," he said.
"the question is whether through cooperative actions between
our governments we can reduce the (trade) imbalance or whether
congress takes action to reduce it through protectionist
bank of japan intervenes soon after tokyo opening
the bank of japan bought a small amount of
dollars shortly after the opening at around 145.30 yen, dealers
the central bank intervened as a medium-sized trading house
sold dollars, putting pressure on the u.s. currency, they said.
the dollar was also supported by a major electrical
consumer goods company, which was a speculative dollar buyer at
the dollar opened at 145.33 yen against 145.60/70 in new
york and 145.25 at the close here yesterday.
indonesian inflation rate 8.8 pct in 1986/87
inflation was by 8.8 pct in indonesia
during fiscal 1986/87 to march 31, compared to 5.66 pct the
previous year, information minister harmoko said after a
cabinet session to discuss the economic situation.
u.k. money market given 53 mln stg assistance
the bank of england said it provided the
money market with 53 mln stg assistance in the morning session.
this compares with the bank's estimate of a shortage in the
system of around 300 mln stg which it earlier revised up from
the central bank made outright purchases of bank bills
comprising 46 mln stg in band three at 9-3/4 pct and seven mln
stg in band four at 9-11/16 pct.
san miguel deal hit by more lawsuits
a bid by san miguel corp (smc) &lt;sanm.mn>
to buy back 38.1 mln sequestered shares from united coconut
planters bank (ucpb) has been hit by two new lawsuits, sources
in the philippine food and brewery company said.
a manila court yesterday issued an injunction barring ucpb
from selling the shares, which represent 31 pct of smc's
outstanding capital stock of 121 mln shares, until hearings on
april 21 on a petition filed by eduardo cojuangco, a former
chairman of both smc and ucpb.
cojuangco said the coconut industry investment fund (ciif)
and 1.4 mln farmers were the rightful owners of the shares.
cojuangco said the shares were held in trust by ucpb and
represented a blue chip investment. his petition said ucpb's
plans to sell the shares to smc were "a serious breach of
the smc sources said the proposed share sale could also be
held up by a second derivative suit filed before the securities
and exchange commission (sec) by eduardo de los angeles, a
government nominee on the company's board.
de los angeles, who represents smc's minority stockholders,
asked the sec to block the transaction, approved last week by
on april 2 the board sanctioned the repurchase of the
sequestered shares for 4.79 billion pesos at 126 pesos per
share. de los angeles told the sec the company's retained
earnings of 1.33 billion pesos would be wiped out by the
purchase of the shares and would prevent the declaration of
de los angeles said the share purchase would also violate
an smc agreement with its creditors to maintain a 2.2-to-1 debt
to equity ratio. he quoted smc's chief financial director ramon
del rosario as telling the board that the transaction would
in petitioning the sec, de los angeles amended an earlier
suit two weeks ago in which he charged smc chairman andres
soriano iii and nine other directors of violating their duties.
de los angeles' earlier complaint related to smc assuming
last december a 26.5 mln dlr loan contracted by smc's hong kong
subsidiary &lt;neptunia corp> for a down payment on the shares.
the loan assumption was again ratified by last week's board
an arbitration panel set up by president corazon aquino to
resolve the ownership issue is expected to submit its report by
"the amended suit filed by eduardo de los angeles is part of
a continuing attempt by certain elements, in complete disregard
of the facts and with questionable motives, to delay an early
disposition of the sequestered shares," san miguel corp said in
"coming as it does, when san miguel corp and ucpb have
reached agreement on the price of the shares and the method of
payment, this suit is in direct contravention of the
government's expressed desire to reach an amicable settlement
of the controversy by april 15," the statement added.
a san miguel spokesman said he had no comment on
cojuangco's court petition, adding: "any statement coming from
us might be interpreted as adversarial."
meanwhile, ramon diaz, the head of a government panel which
sequestered the shares last year, said soriano was not eligible
to buy the major portion of the shares because he was a united
the sequestered shares are split into 24 mln "a" shares,
which can only be owned by filipinos, and 14 mln "b" shares which
smc sources said soriano personally was not among
prospective buyers. they said the shares would be purchased by
the &lt;a.soriano> group of companies, smc, neptunia and unnamed
institutional investors. soriano was named as one of the buyers
in a bid in march 1986 for 33 mln shares controlled by ucpb.
the sale was aborted when diaz's presidential commission on
good government sequestered the shares on suspicion they were
owned by cojuangco, a close associate of former president
ferdinand marcos. cojuangco lives in self-imposed exile in the
u.s.. the shares grew to 38.1 mln after a 15 pct stock dividend
"we have no objection to soriano buying the "b" shares," diaz
told reuters. "but everything is on hold now."
the smc spokesman said he did not know if the controversy
would be resolved before the company's annual stockholders'
san miguel corp reported sales revenue of 12.2 billion
pesos in 1986, 11 pct above its 10.9 billion peso sales in
1985. it said unaudited net profit was in the neighbourhood of
700 mln pesos, an increase of about 50 pct over 1985.
rain boosts central queensland sugar cane crop
good rains of one to four inches in the
past 10 days have boosted moisture-stressed sugar cane crops in
the mackay-burdekin region of queensland's central coast, an
australian sugar producers' association spokesman said.
as previously reported, the region has been undergoing a
severe dry spell, partly relieved by scattered rainfall, since
december, following the virtual failure of the summer wet
mills in the area have been reporting that their crops are
beginning to look healthy and greener and are putting on growth
since the rains began, the spokesman said from brisbane.
although the mackay-burdekin crop outlook is much better
than it was, there will be some cane losses, the spokesman
said. but is too early to say what they will be and more rain
is needed to restore sub-soil moisture.
elsewhere, in far north queensland, the bundaberg region
and southern queensland, the cane is in excellent condition and
some mills are forecasting record crops, he said.
initial 1987 crop estimates will probably be compiled
towards the end of may, he said.
the cane crush normally runs from june to december.
french traders forecast ec sugar tender
the european community (ec) is expected to
award export licences at today's weekly tender for above 60,000
and possibly up to 100,000 tonnes of white sugar after last
week's award for 102,350 tonnes, traders here said.
they expected a maximum rebate of between 46.40 and 46.50
ecus per 100 kilos, compared to last week's 46.864.
earlier, traders in london said the outcome of the tender
was very hard to predict after last week's substantial award
and the placing of 785,000 tonnes of sugar into intervention.
they said they believed the tonnage would be around 60,000 but
declined to give a rebate figure.
italy's la fondiaria to report higher 1986 profits
italian insurer la fondiaria spa &lt;lfdi.mi>
said it expects to report consolidated group profit in 1986
significantly higher than the 60 billion lire reported in 1985.
the company said in a statement that parent company net
profit last year will rise from the 72 billion lire reported in
1985. consolidated group premiums totaled 1,700 billion lire in
1986 compared with 1,490 billion the previous year.
iniziativa meta &lt;inzi.mi>, the financial services unit of
montedison spa &lt;moni.mi>, controls the largest single stake in
nickel prices unlikely to rise much - shearson
nickel prices are unlikely to rise
significantly from current levels unless further steps are
taken to reduce production, shearson lehman brothers said in
the market had recovered slightly to around 1.72 dlrs a lb
yesterday from its four year low of 1.55 dlrs in early january,
due to the absence of soviet nickel cathode deliveries, but
shearson sees soviet shipments soon returning to last year's
buoyant levels, which should ease current tightness.
output reductions by producers will take effect later this
year but are likely to be offset by increases elsewhere.
shearson said the nickel market will be virtually in
balance during 1987, with total non-socialist world demand at
556,000 tonnes, compared with an estimated 544,000 tonnes in
1986, production at 505,000 tonnes (504,000) and imports from
socialist countries at 47,000 tonnes (50,000).
it forecast prices will edge higher during the year from a
first quarter average of 1.67 dlrs a lb up to 1.77 dlrs in the
last quarter. the year's average will be around 1.72 dlrs a lb
compared with 1.76 dlrs in 1986, using london metal exchange
cash metal prices in dollar terms and assuming an average 1987
sterling exchange rate of 1.55 dlrs.
higher 1986 profit for dutch chemical firm dsm
chemical firm nv dsm &lt;dsmn.as> said its 1986 net profit rose to
412 mln guilders from 402 mln in 1985, while turnover fell to
17.7 billion guilders in 1986 from 24.1 billion in 1985.
the company said 1986 dividend, which will be paid to the
dutch state in its capacity of the firm's sole shareholder,
would be raised to 98 mln guilders from 70 mln guilders in
in an initial comment on its 1986 results, dsm said the
drop in 1986 turnover had been caused mainly by losses in the
poehl warns against further dollar fall
said a weaker dollar would be risky and a further appreciation
of the mark would damage prospects for sustained west german
in a speech to the institute of contempory german affairs
here, poehl said "it would be an extremely risky policy to aim
for a further substantial decline in the value of the dollar to
he said the united states could face a vicious circle of
depreciation, inflation and more depreciation if it took that
poehl noted west germany had already taken steps to meet
u.s. demands for greater stimulation of its domestic economy,
accelerating tax cuts, cutting interest rates and tolerating
he said he would have been happy to have brought forward
five billion marks of tax cuts now planned for january 1988 to
the beginning of this year, but he said the government faced
political constraints getting such measures through the upper
house of the west german parliament.
but there were also limits to the impact west germany could
accept on exports from a rising mark, he said.
poehl said west germany relied on exports for about
one-third of its gross national product, so a substantial
erosion of export markets could not be offset by increasing
"a further appreciation of the mark could even be an
obstacle to further growth," he said.
poehl said the bundesbank had tolerated rapid money supply
growth last year because the country enjoyed low inflation and
because external factors, including low oil prices and
favourable terms of trade, had given some extra leeway.
but poehl said west germany now faced a difficult dilemma
the underlying rate of inflation was now two pct, not the
reported negative inflation rates last year, and west germany
was affected more than before by exchange rate developments.
"for the time being, we will have to focus our policy more
on the external side, and we can live with a more expansionary
money supply. but we must be very careful," he said.
he said he shared some of the u.s. concern about japan's
trade surpluses, which affected european countries as well as
poehl welcomed the so-called louvre accord of monetary
officials of major industrialized countries, saying the
importance of the february 22 agreement to stabilize exchange
all partners had agreed that the dollar was at about the
right level, and that further changes would damage growth, he
"this was a remarkable change in attitude, especially on the
part of our american colleagues," he said.
but he said there was still a danger that the correction of
cincinnati bell &lt;csn> starts auxton &lt;auxt> bid
cincinnati bell inc said it has started
its previously-announced 15.75 dlr per share tender offer for
all shares of auxton computer enterprises inc.
in a newspaper advertisement, the company said the tender
and withdrawal rights will expire may five unless extended. the
offer, which has been approved by the auxton board and is to be
followed by a merger at the same price, is conditioned on
receipt of a majority of auxton's voting stock on a fully
california biotech &lt;cbio> sees 1st qtr loss
inc said it expects to report a loss of 1,300,000 dlrs to
1,600,000 dlrs for the first quarter due to increased
investment in research and manufacturing and a scaleup of
the company said research spending is running 50 to 60 pct
above a year ago as it tries to commercialize its products as
quickly as possible, and increased expenditures are expected to
continue for several more quarters.  it said operating results
will fluctuate quarter to quarter, depending on the timing of
in the first three months of 1986, the company lost 150,000
dlrs.  the company changed its fiscal year in 1986 to a
calendar year from a year ending november 30.  for the first
quarter of last year, ended february 28, california biotech
pall corp &lt;pll> sets quarterly dividend
qtly div 8-1/2 cts vs 8-1/2 cts prior
unilever seeks buyer for stauffer chemical
unilever plc and nv &lt;un.as> has issued a
prospectus through investment bankers goldman sachs and co
seeking a buyer for &lt;stauffer chemical co> of the u.s., which
it acquired with the recent takeover of &lt;chesebrough-pond's
he noted unilever has been indicating plans to dispose of
stauffer, plus some smaller assets of chesebrough, since the
the stauffer sale prospectus has been sent in recent weeks
to a number of companies expressing interest.
the unilever spokesman declined to say how much the group
chesebrough's footwear and tennis racket businesses are
also likely to be disposed of, he added.
immediately available financial information on stauffer,
which is wholly-owned, was limited, he added. nine month sales
to september 1986 were about 1.2 billion dlrs.
unilever aquired chesebrough for 3.2 billion dlrs in order
to benefit from its well-known toiletry brands and food
conrac corp said it has entered talks on its acquisition with several parties
conrac corp said it has entered talks on its acquisition with several parties
conrac &lt;cax> in merger talks with several
negotiations with several interested parties on its possible
it said there can be no assurance that any transaction will
result from the talks.  it gave no further details.
mark iv industries inc &lt;iv> started tendering for all
conrac shares at 25 dlrs each on march 24 and owned 9.9 pct of
conrac is a producer and marketer of computer-related
information display and communications equipment which also
produces special purpose architectural and industrial products.
it owns code-a-phone corp, a producer of telephone
for 1986, the company reported profits of 7.8 mln dlrs, or
1.16 dlrs a share, on sales of 153.9 mln dlrs. it has nearly
japan's ldp urges more imports of 12 farm items
the ruling liberal democratic party (ldp)
has proposed expanding imports of 12 farm products named in a
u.s. complaint against japan to the general agreement on
tariffs and trade last year, an ldp official said.
the products include fruit juices, purees and pulp, some
tomato products, peanuts, prepared beef products and beans.
the proposal will be used as the basis for a more detailed
ldp economic package to cut the trade surplus with the u.s. the
party is expected to formalise the package before april 19,
when ldp general council chairman shintaro abe visits
computer research inc &lt;core> 2nd qtr feb 28 net
shr 14 cts vs nine cts
shr 19 cts vs 11 cts
tug crews in new south wales (nsw),
victoria and western australia yesterday lifted their ban on
foreign-flag ships carrying containers but nsw ports are still
being disrupted by a separate dispute, shipping sources said.
the ban, imposed a week ago over a pay claim, had prevented
the movement in or out of port of nearly 20 vessels, they said.
the pay dispute went before a hearing of the arbitration
meanwhile, disruption began today to cargo handling in the
ports of sydney, newcastle and port kembla, they said.
the industrial action at the nsw ports is part of the week
of action called by the nsw trades and labour council to
protest changes to the state's workers' compensation laws.
rubbermaid inc 1st qtr shr 28 cts vs 22 cts
rubbermaid inc 1st qtr shr 28 cts vs 22 cts
independent chairman for dutch cargo dispute
the two sides in the rotterdam port
general cargo dispute have agreed to appoint an independent
chairman, han lammers, to preside over future meetings,
lammers, queen's commissioner for the province of
flevoland, will not act as a mediator but will draw up an
agenda and procedures for meetings between the employers and
unions on a work-practice agreement and proposed redundancies.
two months of strikes in the sector began on january 19 in
protest at employers' proposals for 350 redundancies from the
the strikes were called off by the main port union fnv on
march 13 following an amsterdam court's interim injunction
against the redundancies on procedural grounds.
the court is due to make a final ruling on may 7 but
zeebregts said he expected the judgment to go against the
employers and they were therefore very likely to restart the
complicated legal redundancy procedures in the near future.
meanwhile, the dispute over a new work-practice agreement
in the port's grain sector continued, with 30 maintenance
workers on strike, although loading was not affected, a
spokesman for graan elevator mij, the largest employer in the
the employers have written to the union asking it to
reconsider its position and a meeting of union members has been
electro rent corp &lt;elrc> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
shr 20 cts vs 32 cts
revs 27.1 mln vs 26.2 mln
shr 68 cts vs 1.05 dlrs
revs 82.6 mln vs 78.8 mln
rubbermaid inc &lt;rbd> 1st qtr net
shr 28 cts vs 22 cts
net 20.6 mln vs 16.1 mln
sales 238.0 mln vs 188.8 mln
wtc international inc &lt;waf> 4th qtr feb 28 net
shr profit 13 cts vs loss 33 cts
net profit 1,149,000 vs loss 2,833,000
rev 51.8 mln vs 47.8 mln
shr profit 24 cts vs loss 18 cts
net profit 2,050,000 vs loss 1,551,000
rev 200.6 mln vs 180.1 mln
u.k. money market given further 166 mln stg help
the bank of england said it provided the
market with further help totalling 166 mln stg during the
in band one, it bought 31 mln stg of treasury bills and
three mln stg of bank bills at 9-7/8 pct, while in band two it
bought 69 mln stg of bank bills at 9-13/16 pct. in addition, it
bought 63 mln stg of band three bank bills at 9-3/4 pct.
this brings the total assistance by the bank so far today
to 219 mln stg against a liquidity shortage it has estimated at
mead corp 1st qtr oper shr 1.09 dlrs vs 67 cts
mead corp 1st qtr oper shr 1.09 dlrs vs 67 cts
order rates continue strong and it expects to continue
recording favorable year to year comparisons in each remaining
today the company reported first quarter earnings of 20.6
mln dlrs on sales of 238.0 mln dlrs, up from earnings of 16.1
mln dlrs on sales of 188.8 mln dlrs.
cayuga savings bank &lt;cayb> 1st qtr net
shr 55 cts vs 41 cts
johnstown savings bank fsb &lt;jsbk> 1st qtr net
shr 33 cts vs not given
note: company went public in october 1986.
net includes pretax loan loss provisions of 90,000 dlrs vs
56,250 dlrs and gain on sale of securities of 113,432 dlrs vs
home savings and loan association inc &lt;hsld>
shr 57 cts vs not given
shr 1.15 dlrs vs not given
geodynamics corp &lt;gdyn> 3rd qtr feb 27 net
shr 21 cts vs 20 cts
shr 61 cts vs 58 cts
revs 26.3 mln vs 23.0 mln
swedish unemployment was steady at 2.2
pct of the workforce in march compared with the previous month,
the central bureau of statistics said.
in march 1986, the figure stood at 2.4 pct.
compaq &lt;cpq> expects higher first quarter net
compaq computer corp said it expects
sales and earnings for the first quarter of 1987 to be higher
than analysts expectations due to strong demand for its
rod canion, president and chief executive officer of
compaq, said he expects sales of over 200 mln dlrs for the
period ending march 31, above analysts' estimates of 165-185
mln dlrs. he added that earnings per share would exceed
analysts estimates of as high as 42 cts a share.
compaq reported earnings of 8.3 mln dlrs, or 30 cts a
share, and sales of 144 mln dlrs for the first quarter 1986.
the company said demand for its deskpro 386, portable iii
and the new compaq deskpro 286 will contribute to the sales
"the initial demand for the recently introduced compaq
portable iii and the new models of the compaq deskpro 286
exceeds that of any other compaq personal computers," canion
said. "we saw continued demand for our personal computers
across the quarter, with march (1987) being a particularly
i.u. international &lt;iu> to sell insurance units
reached a preliminary agreement to sell the hawaiian insurance
cos to hawaiian electric industries inc. &lt;he>.
terms of the transaction were not disclosed, the company
the transaction is subject to the execution of definitive
agreements, certain governmental approvals and approvals by the
boards of directors involved, i.u. international said.
hawaiian electric said the planned purchase was part of its
strategy to increase the company's investment in selected
service industries in hawaii, including financial services.
cxr telcom corp &lt;cxrl> 3rd qtr march 31 net
william proxmire (d-wis) said he planned to introduce
legislation shortly to require greater public disclosure of
corporate takeovers and fairer treatment for all shareholders.
speaking to the national association of manufacturers,
proxmire said recent insider trading stock scandals increased
the chance that congress will act to curb abuses.
"we are proposing legislation that would provide for more
disclosure, would be fairer to all shareholders, and would
insure that takeovers are properly financed," he said.
among the provisions, the bill would reduce the threshold
for notifying the securities and exchange commission that a
investor or group has acquired a percentage of stock in a
company to three pct from the current five pct threshold within
in addition, there would be a pre-notificaton requirement
that an investor intended to aquire three pct that would have
proxmire said the pre-notification requirement was meant to
prevent arbitragers from having a jump on the general public in
proxmire said he would call for extending the period that a
tender offer must be kept open under the williams act to 60
business days from the current 20 business days.
his bill would provide for private suits if the acquiring
company violated the time period on the tender offer.
to correct abuses in the financing of takeovers, proxmire
said the legislation would aim at insuring current margin
the federal reserve board has a 50 pct margin requirement
for purchasing stock, but proxmire said it is not generally
rather, the groups or individuals leading a takeover
declare that they can raise the capital for a takeover without
actually putting any of their own money, proxmire said.
he said his bill would allow private suits for damages for
failure to meet the federal reserve's 50 pct margin
the bill also would require more disclose when several
investors form an alliance in a hostile takeover.
"when pickens and icahn get together we want people to know
proxmire said he favored the approach used in britain
towards two-tiered tender offers that insures that all
he said he expected amendments to the bill also would cover
defensive mechanisms such as green mail and poison pills.
proxmire said he intended to introduce his bill later this
month and predicted the senate committee would act this spring.
he said he was hopeful congress could pass a bill this
helen of troy corp &lt;hele> 4th qtr feb 28 net
shr 17 cts vs 13 cts
oper shr profit 1.05 dlrs vs loss 47 cts
oper net profit 3,498,000 vs loss 1,427,000
sales 52.2 mln vs 40.8 mln
note: latest year net excludes 782,000 dlr tax credit.
bankers trust &lt;bt> puts brazil on non-accrual
bankers trust new york corp said it has
placed its approximately 540 mln dlrs of medium- and long-term
loans to brazil on non-accrual status and that first-quarter
net income will be reduced by about seven mln dlrs as a result.
brazil suspended interest payments on its 68 billion dlrs
of medium- and long-term debt on february 22.
u.s. banking regulations do not require banks to stop
accruing interest on loans until payments are 90 days overdue,
but bankers trust said it acted now because of "the high
potential of a continued suspension that would result in
reaching the 90-day limit in the second quarter of 1987."
assuming no cash payments at current interest rates are
received for the rest of 1987, bankers trust estimated that
full-year net income would be reduced by about 30 mln dlrs.
bankers trust said it assumes that debt negotiations
between brazil and its commercial bank lenders will lead to the
the negotiations resume in new york on friday when central
bank governor francisco gros is expected to ask banks for a
90-day rollover of some 9.5 billion dlrs of term debt that
&lt;first mercantile currency fund inc> 1st qtr net
shr profit 63 cts vs 22 cts
uk intervention bd says ec sold 118,350 tonnes white sugar at rebate 46.496 ecus.
uk intervention bd says ec sold 118,350 tonnes white sugar at rebate 46.496 ecus.
stoltenberg sees moves to strengthen paris accord
stoltenberg said today's meetings of major industrial countries
would look at ways of strengthening the paris accord on
stoltenberg told journalists he saw no fundamental weakness
of the february 22 agreement of the group of five countries and
canada to keep exchange rates near the then-current levels.
but he declined to say what measures would be discussed
ahead of a communique of the group of seven ministers later
stoltenberg and bundesbank president karl otto poehl said
the importance of the paris agreement, also known as the louvre
stoltenberg said there is greater agreement now among major
countries than six months ago, at the time of the annual
meeting of the international monetary fund and world bank,
marked by sharp discord between the united states and its major
"there is no fundamental weakness of the paris accord," he
said. "we will be looking at ways of strengthening it, but i do
not want to discuss that here.
stoltenberg said the louvre agreement was working despite a
"slight firming" of the yen against the dollar.
and poehl noted that the dollar/mark parity was unchanged
since february 22 without the bundesbank having had to sell
"the louvre agreement has been honored by the market," he
poehl said west germany had lived up to its side of the
bargain in paris by preparing the way for tax cuts to be
accelerated as a way of stimulating growth.
poehl said, however, that japan had not yet fulfilled its
"and we will have to see if the united states is able to do
what they promised in paris on reducing the budget deficit --
and get it through congress," he added.
stoltenberg reiterated west german concern about a further
fall in the dollar, noting that the mark was up 85 pct against
the dollar and nearly 20 pct on a trade-weighted basis.
"you cannot expect that to go unnoticed in an economy. and
it is not just a german problem, it is a european problem," he
u.k. intervention board details ec sugar sales
a total 118,350 tonnes of current series
white sugar received export rebates of a maximum 46.496
european currency units (ecus) per 100 kilos at today's
european community (ec) tender, the u.k. intervention board
out of this, traders in the u.k. received 37,800 tonnes, in
france 34,500, in west germany 20,000, in belgium 18,500, in
spain 5,800 and in denmark 1,750 tonnes, it added.
earlier today, london traders had declined to give a
projected view on the level of subsidy although some said total
tonnage awards would be around 60,000 tonnes.
paris traders foresaw between 60,000 and 100,000 tonnes
being authorised for export at a 46.40/46.50 ecu subsidy.
cumulative sales authorisations for the current season
(1986/87) now stand at 2,194,970 tonnes (43 weeks).
last week saw 102,350 tonnes whites authorised for export
under licences to end-sep at the higest ever rebate of 46.864
european currency units (ecus) per 100 kilos.
mead &lt;mea> expects improved earnings this year
mead corp said the outlook for its
major paper markets looks strong for the second quarter and
augurs well for its earnings in 1987.
"the generally strong outlook bodes well for significantly
improved earnings this year," burnell roberts, chairman and
earlier, the company reported first quarter earnings of
34.2 mln dlrs, or 1.09 dlrs a share, versus 20.3 mln dlrs, or
65 cts a share, in last year's first quarter.
in 1986 the company reported earnings from continuing
operations of 109.3 mln dlrs, or 3.50 dlrs a share.
mead said its first quarter benefitted from stronger market
"the combination of capital improvement programs and more
employee involvement has been paying off throughout our paper
he added that mead's pulp and paperboard businesses are
operating well as prices have improved and strong demand has
placed most products in a sold-out position through the middle
mead said sales of its unbleached coated paperboard was
particularly strong, up 13 pct versus the first quarter 1986.
amertek inc &lt;atekf> 1st qtr net
shr profit 20 cts vs loss three cts
net profit 849,299 vs loss 82,512
alex brown inc &lt;absb> 1st qtr march 27 net
shr primary 78 cts vs 68 cts
shr diluted 75 cts vs 68 cts
qtrly div six cts vs five cts
revs 78.7 mln vs 61.9 mln
note: pay date for the qtrly div is april 28 for
town and country jewelry manufacturing &lt;tcjc>
shr 46 cts vs 22 cts
sales 30.8 mln vs 20.6 mln
shr 1.34 dlrs vs 1.15 dlrs
sales 107.2 mln vs 71.6 mln
note: town and country jewelry manufacturing corp.
acquired thermo-print gmbh of lohn, west germany, a distributor
of paxar products, for undisclosed terms.
&lt;mark's work wearhouse ltd> year jan 31 net
shr 10 cts vs 32 cts
sales 159.1 mln vs 147.3 mln
canadian bashaw, erskine resources to merge
gas ltd said it agreed to merge with erskine resources ltd.
ownership of the combined company with 18.8 pct for the
current shareholders of canadian bashaw and 81.2 pct to the
current shareholders of erskine, the companies said.
entourage &lt;entg> has first quarter loss
entourage international inc said it had
a first quarter loss of 104,357 dlrs, after incurring 70,000
dlrs in costs for an internal audit, a report for shareholders
and proxy soliciation and 24,000 dlrs in startup expenses for
the company went public during 1986.
entourage also said it has started marketing a solid
perfume packaged in a lipstick tube called "amadeus," retailing
the company also said it has acquired north country media
&lt;mr. jax fashions inc> year feb 28 net
shr 58 cts vs 29 cts
sales 24.7 mln vs 13.0 mln
f.w. woolworth co says it hikes dividend to 33 cts a share from 28 cts
f.w. woolworth co says it hikes dividend to 33 cts a share from 28 cts
f.w. woolworth co &lt;z> hikes dividend
qtly div 33 cts vs 28 cts prior
dutch sugar beet planting half finished
roughly half of this year's expected
130,000 hectare dutch sugar beet crop is already in the ground,
a spokesman for suiker unie, the largest sugar processor in the
conditions are generally good and the average sowing date
for the crop is expected to be around april 11, against april
23 last year, and a 10-year average of april 14, the spokesman
"it is far too early yet to say what kind of output we can
expect when it comes to harvest in september, but at least the
crop is off to a very good start," he said.
last year, the netherlands planted a record 137,600
hectares of sugar beet and produced a record 1.2 mln tonnes of
white sugar, substantially more than the country's combined "a"
and "b" quota of 872,000 tonnes.
this year, however, a self-imposed quota system has been
introduced with the aim of cutting plantings to 130,000
hectares and reducing white sugar output to around 915,000
tonnes to minimise the amount of non-quota "c" sugar produced.
only farmers with a record of growing suger beet have been
allotted quotas. this is expected to prevent the area being
boosted by dairy or cereal farmers moving into sugar.
j.p. morgan and co inc 1st qtr shr 1.22 dlrs vs 1.28 dlrs
j.p. morgan and co inc 1st qtr shr 1.22 dlrs vs 1.28 dlrs
the ec commission confirmed it granted
export licences for 118,350 tonnes of current series white
sugar at a maximum export rebate of 46.496 european currency
out of this, traders in france received 34,500 tonnes, in
the u.k. 37,800, in west-germany 20,000, in belgium 18,500, in
spain 5,800 and in denmark 1,750 tonnes.
vw, is due to make a formal announcement about its 1986
dividend tomorrow after saying the 1985 level of 10 marks per
ordinary share would be held, despite massive losses because of
a spokesman said vw's supervisory board will meet tomorrow
to discuss the payout.  a statement will be made afterwards.
vw has also said disclosed profits for 1986 will reach
their 1985 level, despite provisions of a possible 480 mln
marks linked to the currency affair. the figure is virtually
the same as the 477 mln mark 1985 parent company net profit.
when vw first confirmed the currency scandal on march 10 it
said the management board would propose an unchanged 10-mark
dividend to the supervisory board. a dividend of 11 marks would
be proposed for the company's new preference shares.
share analysts said they saw supervisory board approval of
the management board proposal as virtually a formality.
"anything else would be more than a surprise," one said.
company sources said vw would have to dig into reserves to
maintain the disclosed profit. parent company reserves stood at
around three billion marks at end-1985.
citytrust bancorp inc &lt;citr> 1st qtr net
shr 1.40 dlrs vs 1.16 dlrs
southmark &lt;sm> acquires 28 nursing homes
southmark corp said it acquired 28
long-term care facilities containing for approximately 70 mln
it said the facilities, which contain approximately 2,500
beds in seven western states, were bought from don bybee and
the acquistion brings to 57 health care facilities acquired
in the last three months, the company said.
j.p. morgan and co inc &lt;jpm> 1st qtr net
shr 1.22 dlrs vs 1.28 dlrs
net 226.4 mln vs 233.9 mln
assets 80.45 billion vs 70.23 billion
loans 35.16 billion vs 35.99 billion
deposits 45.22 billion vs 39.68 billion
return on assets 1.14 pct vs 1.35 pct
return on common equity 18.20 pct vs 22.08 pct
note: 1987 qtr net was reduced by 20 mln dlrs because 1.3
billion dlrs of loans to brazil were placed on non-accrual.
loan loss provision 35 mln dlrs vs 70 mln year earlier.
firstbanc corp of ohio &lt;fboh> 1st qtr net
shr 74 cts vs 67 cts
mayfair super markets inc &lt;myfra> 2nd qtr net
shr class a 61 cts vs 48 cts
shr class b 59 cts vs 46 cts
shr class a 1.15 dlrs vs 86 cts
shr class b 1.13 dlrs vs 84 cts
note: qtr and six mths prior figures reflect two-for-one
hanover insurance &lt;hins> get split approval
stockholders approved a two-for-one stock split.
as a result of the split, hanover said it increases the
number of authorized shares of capital stock from 10.4 mln,
having a par value of one dlr, to 20.9 mln, also having a par
the stock split is payable april 30 to stockholders of
has acquired a number of security services companies recently,
with aggregate revenues of about 3,500,000 dlrs, for an
aggregate cost of about 2,700,000 dlrs.
it said it acquired guard service companies c.s.c. security
gaurd service of paramus, n.j., from cartel security
consultants inc, the guard services division of security
services of america of wayne, n.j., capital investigations and
protective agency of hackensack, n.j., and meyer detective
agency inc of national park, n.j.
the company said it bought alarm service operations
certified security services inc of key west, fla., custom
security services of myrtle beach, s.c., a-t-e security group
inc of houston and the louisville, kent and nashville, tenn,
offices of wells fargo alarm services.
qtly distribution 7-1/2 cts vs 7-1/2 cts prior (excluding
note: full name is universal medical buildings l.p.
zambia does not plan retail maize price hike
the zambian government has no immediate
plans to follow last week's increase in the producer price of
maize with a hike in the retail price of maize meal, an
official of the ruling party said.
last december, a 120 pct increase in the consumer price for
refined maize meal, a zambian staple, led to food riots in
which at least 15 people died.
that price increase, which president kenneth kaunda later
revoked, followed pressure by the international monetary fund
(imf) to reduce the government's subsidy bill.
however, if the producer price rise, from 6.10 dlrs to 8.67
dlrs per 90-kg bag, is not accompanied by a retail price
increase, the government will have to spend more on subsidies,
a practice discouraged by the imf.
"there is no way out but to raise the subsidy levels of
meal. it (the government) would have to choose between the
demands of the imf and those of the people," a ministry of
said shareholkders have approved the acquisition of its
advisor, wedgestone advisory corp, for 600,000 shares.
it said completion is expected to take place april 10.
sun &lt;sun> cuts heating oil barge price
sun co's sun refining and marketing co
subsidiary said it is decreasing the price it charges contract
barge customers for heating oil in ny harbor by 0.50 cent a
the 0.50 cent a gallon price reduction brings sun's heating
oil contract barge price to 50 cts a gallon, the company said.
further argentine coarse grain losses feared
their yield estimates for the 1986/87 coarse grain crop
downward in the week to yesterday after the heavy rains at the
end of march and beginning of april, trade sources said.
they said sunflower, maize and sorghum production estimates
had been reduced despite some later warm, dry weather, which
has allowed a return to harvesting in some areas.
however, as showers fell intermittently after last weekend,
producers feared another spell of prolonged and intense rain
could cause more damage to crops already badly hit this season.
rains in the middle of last week reached an average of 27
millimetres in parts of buenos aires province, 83 mm in
cordoba, 41 in santa fe, 50 in entre rios and misiones, 95 in
corrientes, eight in chaco and 35 in formosa.
there was no rainfall in the same period in la pampa.
producers feared continued damp conditions could produce
rotting and lead to still lower yield estimates for all the
however, as the lands began drying later in the week
harvesting advanced considerably, reaching between 36 and 40
pct of the area sown in the case of sunflower.
deterioration of the sunflower crop evident in harvested
material in cordoba, la pampa and buenos aires forced yield
estimates per hectare to be adjusted down again.
the season's sunflowerseed production is now forecast at
2.1 mln to 2.3 mln tonnes, against 2.2 mln to 2.4 mln forecast
last week and down 43.9 to 48.8 pct on the 1985/86 record of
area sown to sunflowers was two to 2.2 mln hectares, 29.9
to 36.3 pct below the record 3.14 mln hectares last season.
maize harvesting has also reached 36 to 40 pct of the area
sown. it is near completion in cordoba and santa fe and will
begin in la pampa and southern buenos aires later in april.
production estimates for maize were down from last week at
9.5 mln to 9.8 mln tonnes, against 9.6 mln to 9.9 mln estimated
this is 22.2 to 23.4 pct below the 12.4 mln to 12.6 mln
tonnes estimated by private sources for the 1985/86 crop and
21.9 to 25.8 pct down on the official figure of 12.8 mln
maize was sown on 3.58 mln to 3.78 mln hectares, two to
seven pct down on last season's 3.85 mln.
sorghum was harvested on 23 to 25 pct of the area sown in
cordoba, santa fe and chaco. harvest will start in la pampa and
the total area sown was 1.23 mln to 1.30 mln hectares, 10.3
to 15.2 pct down on the 1.45 mln sown last season.
the new forecast for the sorghum crop is 2.9 mln to 3.2 mln
tonnes compared with three mln to 3.3 mln forecast last week,
and is 23.8 to 29.3 pct down on last season's 4.1 mln to 4.2
the soybean crop for this season was not adjusted,
remaining at a record 7.5 mln to 7.7 mln tonnes, up 4.2 to 5.5
pct on the 7.2 mln to 7.3 mln estimated by private sources for
1985/86 and 5.6 to 8.5 pct higher than the official figure of
the area sown to soybeans this season was a record 3.7 mln
to 3.8 mln hectares, 10.8 to 13.8 pct up on the record 3.34 mln
the soybean crop is showing excessive moisture in some
areas and producers fear they may discover more damage. some
experimental harvesting was carried out in santa fe on areas
making up only about one pct of the total crop but details on
preparation of the fields for the 1987/88 wheat crop, which
will be sown between may and august or september, has so far
not been as intense as in previous years.
dutch adjusted unemployment rises in march
rose in the month to end-march to a total 693,000 from 690,600
at end-february, but was well down from 730,100 at end-march
1986, social affairs ministry figures show.
the figure for male jobless rose by 2,000 in the month to
436,500 compared with 470,700 a year earlier. the figure for
women was 256,500 at end-march against 256,100 a month earlier
on an unadjusted basis total unemployment fell by 16,500 in
the month to end-march to 692,200. in march 1986 the figure was
a ministry spokesman said the unadjusted figures showed a
smaller than usual seasonal decrease for the time of year,
because of particularly cold weather delaying work in the
building industry. he said this explained the increase in the
total vacancies available rose by 1,900 to 26,300 at
end-march. a year earlier the figure was 28,763.
top officials arrive at treasury for g-5 talks
nations arrived at the u.s. treasury main building to begin a
meeting of the group of five.
officials seen arriving by reuter correspondents included
west german finance minister gerhard stoltenberg and bundesbank
president karl otto poehl, french finance minister edouard
balladur and his central banker jacques de larosiere.
also seen arriving were japanese finance minister kiichi
miyazawa and japan's central bank governor satoshi sumita and
british chancellor of the exchequer and central bank governor
there was no immediate sign of italian or canadian
officials. monetary sources have said a fully blown meeting of
the group of seven is expected to begin around 3 p.m. local
time (1900 gmt) and last at least until 6 p.m. (2200 gmt), when
a communique is expected to be issued.
italian sources said italian acting finance minister
giovanni goria met treasury secretary james baker last night.
at those talks baker apparently convinced goria, who
declined to attend the february meeting of the group of seven
in paris, that italy would participate fully in any meaningful
fed expected to set customer repurchases
the federal reserve is expected to
intervene in the government securities market to supply
temporary reserves indirectly via customer repurchase
economists expect the fed to execute 2.0-2.5 billion dlrs
of customer repos to offset pressures from the end of the
two-week bank reserve maintenance period today. some also look
for a permanent reserve injection to offset seasonal pressures
via an outright purchase of bills or coupons this afternoon.
the federal funds rate opened at 6-3/8 pct and remained at
that level, up from yesterday's 6.17 pct average.
association inc> said it sold its subsidiary, source
telecomputing corp, to the venture capital firm of &lt;welsh,
the purchase price was not disclosed, reader's digest said.
it said it purchased an 80 pct stake in source in 1980 and
earned an unspecified profit on 14 mln dlrs in revenues in
weis markets inc &lt;wmk> 1st qtr march 28 net
shr 59 cts vs 51 cts
net 18.0 mln vs 15.6 mln
revs 278.6 mln vs 272.2 mln
shareholders approved a capital reorganization to allow an
initial payout by the end of may to common shareholders from
last year's 200 mln canadian dlr sale of most continental
assets to &lt;lloyds bank plc>'s lloyds bank canada.
the bank said the initial distribution would take the form
of a stock dividend of cumulative redeemable retractable class
a series two preferred shares entitling holders to monthly
floating rate dividends at 72 pct of prime and to 12.75 dlrs a
continental said the initial payout was subject to canadian
the bank reiterated that total distributions to common
shareholders would range from 16.50 dlrs a share to 17.25 dlrs
including the initial stock dividend and a final distribution
in late 1988 or early 1989.
the payout of existing preferred shareholders will be
completed just before next month's initial distribution to
atlas consolidated mining and development &lt;acmb>
shr loss 17 cts vs loss 22 cts
net loss 14.5 mln vs loss 18.0 mln
revs 27.3 mln vs 23.7 mln
shr 58 cts vs 1.01 dlrs
net loss 48.3 mln vs loss 84.2 mln
revs 111.7 mln vs 141.9 mln
note: atlas consolidated mining and development corp of
translated from philippine pesos at 20.3489 pesos to dollar
vs 18.5571 in quarter and 20.2315 vs 18.2743 in year.
sci-med &lt;smls> board agrees to bristol&lt;bmy>deal
its directors approved a previously proposed agreement of
the proposed transaction is subject to completion of a due
diligence investigation, including a review by bristol-myers of
a patent infringement suit served on sci-med by advanced
cardiovascular systems inc on march 31, 1987.
bristol-myers has the right to call off the agreement under
sci-med said it continues to believe the patent suit is
fidelcor &lt;ficr> completes sale of unit
fidelcor inc said it has completed
the sale of its industrial valley title insurance co subsidiary
to a group of investors including the unit's management for
industrial valley has assets of about 37.6 mln dlrs and was
acquired last year along with ivb financial corp.
data translation inc &lt;datx> 1st qtr feb 28 net
shr 18 cts vs 13 cts
cheap oil feedstocks, the weakened u.s.
dollar and a plant utilization rate approaching 90 pct will
propel the streamlined u.s. petrochemical industry to record
profits this year, with growth expected through at least 1990,
this bullish outlook for chemical manufacturing and an
industrywide move to shed unrelated businesses has prompted gaf
corp &lt;gaf>, privately-held cain chemical inc, and other firms
to aggressively seek acquisitions of petrochemical plants.
oil companies such as ashland oil inc &lt;ash>, the
kentucky-based oil refiner and marketer, are also shopping for
"i see us poised at the threshold of a golden period," said
paul oreffice, chairman of giant dow chemical co &lt;dow>, adding,
"there's no major plant capacity being added around the world
now. the whole game is bringing out new products and improving
analysts say the chemical industry's biggest customers,
automobile manufacturers and home builders that use a lot of
paints and plastics, are expected to buy quantities this year.
u.s. petrochemical plants are currently operating at about
90 pct capacity, reflecting tighter supply that could hike
product prices by 30 to 40 pct this year, said john dosher,
managing director of pace consultants inc of houston. demand
for some products such as styrene could push profit margins up
by as much as 300 pct, he said.
oreffice, speaking at a meeting of chemical engineers in
houston, said dow would easily top the 741 mln dlrs it earned
last year and predicted it would have the best year in its
in 1985, when oil prices were still above 25 dlrs a barrel
and chemical exports were adversely affected by the strong u.s.
dollar, dow had profits of 58 mln dlrs. "i believe the entire
chemical industry is headed for a record year or close to it,"
gaf chairman samuel heyman estimated that the u.s. chemical
industry would report a 20 pct gain in profits during 1987.
last year, the domestic industry earned a total of 13 billion
dlrs, a 54 pct leap from 1985.
the turn in the fortunes of the once-sickly chemical
industry has been brought about by a combination of luck and
dosher said last year's fall in oil prices made feedstocks
dramatically cheaper and at the same time the american dollar
was weakening against foreign currencies. that helped boost
also helping to bring supply and demand into balance has
been the gradual market absorption of the extra chemical
manufacturing capacity created by middle eastern oil producers
finally, virtually all major u.s. chemical manufacturers
have embarked on an extensive corporate restructuring program
to mothball inefficient plants, trim the payroll and eliminate
unrelated businesses. the restructuring touched off a flurry of
gaf, which made an unsuccessful attempt in 1985 to acquire
union carbide corp &lt;uk>, recently offered three billion dlrs
for borg warner corp &lt;bor>, a chicago manufacturer of plastics
and chemicals. another industry powerhouse, w.r. grace &lt;gra>
has divested its retailing, restaurant and fertilizer
businesses to raise cash for chemical acquisitions.
but some experts worry that the chemical industry may be
headed for trouble if companies continue turning their back on
the manufacturing of staple petrochemical commodities, such as
ethylene, in favor of more profitable specialty chemicals that
are custom-designed for a small group of buyers.
"companies like dupont &lt;dd> and monsanto co &lt;mtc> spent the
past two or three years trying to get out of the commodity
chemical business in reaction to how badly the market had
deteriorated," dosher said. "but i think they will eventually
kill the margins on the profitable chemicals in the niche
market." some top chemical executives share the concern.
"the challenge for our industry is to keep from getting
carried away and repeating past mistakes," gaf's heyman
cautioned. "the shift from commodity chemicals may be
ill-advised. specialty businesses do not stay special long."
houston-based cain chemical, created this month by the
sterling investment banking group, believes it can generate 700
mln dlrs in annual sales by bucking the industry trend.
chairman gordon cain, who previously led a leveraged buyout
of dupont's conoco inc's chemical business, has spent 1.1
billion dlrs since january to buy seven petrochemical plants
the plants produce only basic commodity petrochemicals that
are the building blocks of specialty products.
"this kind of commodity chemical business will never be a
glamorous, high-margin business," cain said, adding that demand
is expected to grow by about three pct annually.
garo armen, an analyst with dean witter reynolds, said
chemical makers have also benefitted by increasing demand for
plastics as prices become more competitive with aluminum, wood
and steel products. armen estimated the upturn in the chemical
business could last as long as four or five years, provided the
u.s. economy continues its modest rate of growth.
fidata corp &lt;fid> 4th qtr loss
shr loss two cts vs profit 38 cts
net loss 90,000 vs profit 1,685,000
shr profit 3.37 dlrs vs profit 46 cts
net profit 15.0 mln vs profit 2,047,000
revs 26.2 mln vs 123.6 mln
note: net includes pretax securities sale gain 10,000 dlrs
vs loss 1,000 dlrs in quarter and gain 486,000 dlrs vs loss
net includes pretax gains on sale of businesses of nil vs
4,656,000 dlrs in quarter and 26.0 mln dlrs vs 4,656,000 dlrs
net includes pretax losses on disposition of product line
of nil vs 3,150,000 dlrs in quarter and 3,300,000 dlrs vs
quarter net includes tax credits of 102,000 dlrs vs 736,000
net includes reversal of tax loss carryforwards of 259,000
dlrs vs 264,000 dlrs in quarter and tax loss carryforwards of
8,635,000 dlrs vs 579,000 dlrs in year.
marble financial corp &lt;mrbl> 1st qtr net
oper shr 26 cts vs not given
note: 1987 net excludes 157,000 dlr gain from termination
company went public in august 1986.
dominion textile calls report of bid for burlington rumor
dominion textile calls report of bid for burlington rumor
raytheon co 1st qtr shr 1.37 dlrs vs 1.19 dlrs
raytheon co 1st qtr shr 1.37 dlrs vs 1.19 dlrs
fleet financial group 1st qtr shr 73 cts vs 60 cts
fleet financial group 1st qtr shr 73 cts vs 60 cts
qtly div 30 cts vs 30 cts prior
independent bank corp &lt;ibcp> regular dividend
qtly div 10 cts vs 10 cts previously
raytheon co &lt;rtn> 1st qtr net
shr 1.37 dlrs vs 1.19 dlrs
net 101.8 mln vs 92.3 mln
revs 1.750 billion vs 1.725 billion
avg shrs 74.2 mln vs 77.8 mln
waltham savings bank &lt;wlbk> initial dividend
qtly div eight cts vs n.a.
fleet financial group &lt;flt> 1st qtr net
shr primary 73 cts vs 60 cts
shr diluted 70 cts vs 58 cts
note: qtr net interest income is 130.7 mln dlrs vs 114.8
mln dlrs. earnings per share reflects two-for-one common stock
dominion calls burlington &lt;bur> report rumor
published report that it has bought a stake in burlington
industries inc and is considering making a joint bid for the
company to be a rumor, a company spokesman said.
"as far as i am concerned and the company is concerned, they
are rumors and we're not commenting on rumors," spokesman michel
dufour told reuters in response to a query.
"all the information that has been given out publicly is
that, yes, dominion textile is interested in making an
acquisition that big...probably based on that people are
starting all sorts of rumors," he said.
dufour said yes when asked whether the report was only a
rumor, but said the company was not prepared to comment
further. dominion textile president and chairman thomas bell
was out of town and unavailable for comment.
dominion textile last year made an unsuccesful 104-mln-
u.s.-dlr bid for avondale mills and has maintained a 120-mln-
u.s.-dlr line of credit to be used for an american acquisition.
dufour said the company has been negotiating with "many"
u.s. textile companies but would not say whether burlington
burlington's stock rose sharply this morning on the report,
which said dominion textile had joined with u.s. investor asher
edelman to buy a stake in the company and to consider making a
dominion textile, which reported operating profit of 11.1
mln canadian dlrs last year on sales of 926.5 mln dlrs, has
repeatedly said it will concentrate on expanding into the u.s.
the company has said it plans to diversify into new product
and market areas in addition to expanding its textile
fed sets overnight system repurchases, fed says
fed sets overnight system repurchases, fed says
raytheon &lt;rtn> net rises on operations
raytheon said a 10 pct rise in
its first quarter net to 101.8 mln dlrs reflected improved
operations and a lower effective tax rate.
the company said revenue gains in electronics, major
appliances and other lines were offset by decreases in energy
services and aircraft products. revenues in the quarter rose
1.4 pct to 1.75 billion dlrs, it said.
the company said backlog stood at 7.520 billion dlrs, down
from 7.912 billion dlrs a year earlier. it said a five year
3.55 billion dlr u.s. defense contract was awarded shortly
after the close of the first quarter.
general instrument corp &lt;grl> 4th qtr loss
shr loss 2.80 dlrs vs profit 17 cts
net loss 90.5 mln vs profit 5,271,000
revs 240.9 mln vs 159.4 mln
shr loss 2.49 dlrs vs loss 2.07 dlrs
net loss 80.4 mln vs loss 66.5 mln
revs 787.9 mln vs 612.4 mln
note: includes loss of 89.6 mln dlrs vs loss 14.5 mln dlrs
in year and loss of 91.6 mln dlrs in current qtr from
1986 qtr includes pretax gain of five mln dlrs from
settlement of litigation and tax gain of 5.1 mln dlrs from
change in estimated effective tax rate.
cocoa exporters expected to limit sales
major cocoa exporters are likely to
limit sales in the weeks ahead in an effort to boost world
prices, sources close to a meeting of the cocoa producers
the sources said the depressed world market had been one of
the main topics discussed in a closed door meeting of the
11-member cpa which began on monday.
they said producers agreed that cutting sales would aid the
buffer stock manager of a new international cocoa pact in his
major cocoa producing and consuming nations agreed
operation rules for the buffer stock at a meeting in london
last month and the stock manager is expected to enter the
prices, under the weight of three successive cocoa
surpluses, recently fell to the level at which the manager has
to buy cocoa under stock rules.
the buffer stock aims to keep prices within a pre-set range
by buying when prices fall and selling when they rise.
"the world's cocoa price at present is just not interesting,"
commented one delegate representing a major cpa producer.
another source said that with much of the 1986/87
(october-september) world cocoa crop sold, limiting sales in
the near term concerns essentially next year's harvest.
the sources noted, however, that the cocoa industry in
brazil, the world's number two producer, is in private hands.
this means limiting sales is more difficult than in major west
african producers, where sales are made or authorized by
the cpa includes the world's top three producers, ivory
coast, brazil and ghana, and accounts for 80 pct of all output.
the meeting here is due to end tomorrow evening.
fed adds reserves via overnight repurchases
the federal reserve entered the u.s.
government securities market to arrange overnight system
repurchase agreements, a fed spokesman said.
dealers said that federal funds were trading at 6-3/8 pct
when the fed began its temporary and direct supply of reserves
honduras seeking pl-480 bulk wheat april 13
honduras will tender april 13 under
public law 480 for approximately 52,500 tonnes of various
wheats in bulk, an agent for the country said.
the agent said honduras is seeking u.s. no. 2 or better
northern spring/dns, with 14 pct protein minimum and 13 pct
moisture maximum, and u.s. no. 2 or better hard red winter,
with 12 pct protein minimum and 13 pct moisture maximum.
the agent said ns/dns laydays include july 1-10 for
7,500-9,500 tonnes, aug 1-10 for 8,000-10,000 tonnes, and sept
hrw laydays include june 20-30 on 5,000-7,000 tonnes, july
15-25 for 6,500-8,500 tonnes, and september 15-25 for
offers are due by 1550 hrs edt, april 13, and will remain
valid until 1000 hrs edt, april 14, the agent said.
j.p. morgan &lt;jpm> net hurt by brazil, trading
j.p. morgan and co inc said its
first-quarter earnings fell by 3.2 pct, largely reflecting its
previously announced decision to place on non-accrual status
its 1.3 billion dlrs of medium- and long-term loans to brazil.
that decision, spurred by brazil's suspension of interest
payments on february 20, reduced the quarter's net income by 20
mln dlrs to 226.4 mln dlrs, compared with 233.9 mln in the
morgan also reported a loss of 1.8 mln dlrs from securities
underwriting and trading, in contrast to a gain of 45.4 mln
in the fourth quarter of 1986, morgan posted other trading
losses of 5.5 mln dlrs because of setbacks in the trading and
conditions in some sectors of the euromarket remained
difficult last quarter, with floating rate notes suffering
heavy price falls, but a spokeswoman was unable to say whether
morgan's trading losses were restricted to the euromarket.
on the positive side, morgan reduced its provision for loan
losses to 35 mln dlrs from 70 mln a year earlier. foreign
exchange trading income rose to 82 mln dlrs from 72.6 mln and
trust income increased to 95.9 mln dlrs from 75.9 mln.
morgan said other operating income, mainly fees and
commissions, rose to 102.2 mln dlrs from 88.4 mln, but net
investment securities gains dropped to 43.1 mln from 58.1 mln.
net interest earnings were 490.4 mln dlrs in the first
quarter, down from 499.4 mln a year earlier, and net yield fell
to 2.79 pct from 3.20 pct.
if brazil had not been placed on non-accrual, which means
that interest can be recorded as income only when payments are
actually received, net interest earnings would have been 525.9
mln dlrs and net yield 2.99 pct. if brazil does not resume
payments, 1987 net would be cut by 72 mln dlrs, morgan added.
after the provision for loan losses, morgan's allowance for
credit losses at the end of march totaled 953 mln dlrs compared
with 910 mln at end-1986 and 815 mln a year earlier.
it reported net recoveries of six mln dlrs after
charge-offs of eight mln, compared with net charge-offs of 49
mln dlrs after recoveries of three mln a year earlier.
excluding brazil, non-accruing loans at quarter's end were
583 mln dlrs, down from 633 mln at end-1986 and 684 mln a year
earlier. non-interest expenses rose to 371.1 mln dlrs from
303.5 mln dlrs, with more than half the increase related to
atlas consolidated mining &lt;acmb> 4th qtr
shr loss 17.3 cts vs 21.5 cts
net loss 14.5 mln vs loss 18.0 mln
revs 27.3 mln vs 23.7 mln
shr loss 58 cts vs loss 1.01 dlrs
net loss 48.3 mln vs loss 84.2 mln
revs 111.7 mln vs 141.9 mln
brazil grain harvest faces storage problems
grain crop are likely to result in losses of about five mln
tonnes, an agriculture ministry spokesman said.
ministry spokesman leonardo brito, speaking from brasilia,
told reuters he believed that about five mln tonnes of this
year's estimated crop of 65 mln tonnes would be lost.
he said part of this would be the normal loss inevitable in
harvesting, but that most of it would stem from storage
brazil has a storage capacity of 66 mln tonnes,
but brito said that the storage capacity was badly
distributed. the states of sao paulo, parana and rio grande do
sul had between them 70 pct of the nation's capacity, but were
responsible for only 50 to 60 pct of production.
the biggest problems are concentrated in the centre-west
growing regions, where rising production has outpaced storage
brito said the centre-west, whose crops include soya and
maize, had between 30 and 40 pct of the nation's grains
production but only 20 pct of its storage space.
in addition to the poor distribution of storage units,
there is the problem that too much of the capacity is geared to
storing grain in sacks, while not enough is suitable for
finally, there is a shortage of lorries to transport the
the sheer scale of the task in transporting the record crop
has been evident from television reports, which have shown
enormous queues of lorries waiting outside granaries.
fleet &lt;flt> shareholders approve share increase
shareholders approved an increase in shares of the company's
authorized common stock to 100,000,000 shares from 75,000,000
the company said shareholders approved the move at the
annual meeting in providence today when the company reported
that its first quarter earnings rose to 38.5 mln dlrs, or 73
cts a share, from 31.7 mln dlrs, or 60 cts a share, in the
j. terence murray, chairman and president of fleet
financial, said, "fleet's mortgage banking activities in
particular continued to produce signficant income increases (in
murray said fleet's mortgage servicing portfolio reached
22.1 billion dlrs by march 31, including 1.8 billion dlrs
rowe furniture corp &lt;rowe> 1st qtr feb 28
shr 42 cts vs 35 cts
revs 23.2 mln vs 21.9 mln
reuters chairman urges freer information flows
authorities should abolish their restrictions on full and free
dissemination of information to the investment and banking
communities, reuters holdings plc &lt;rtrs.l> chairman sir
in the 1986 annual repoprt, he said lengthy negotiations
had brought agreement with the tokyo and london stock exchanges
for fuller, but still not complete, access to market data
"many other markets maintain restrictions," he added.
hogg said members of some markets appear to believe that
in other cases, exchanges seem to be limiting the
distribution of data in order to provide competitive advantage
to their own commercial information businesses.
he also noted that despite increasing liberalisation in the
telecommunications field, some countries continue to protect
their state monopolies at the expense of other economic
"reuter dealing services remain excluded from such
countries. as a result, banking communities serving entire
economies are put at a competitive disadvantage," he added.
reuters increased its 1986 pre-tax profit by 39 pct from
the previous year to 130.1 mln stg on a 43 pct rise in revenues
earnings per ordinary share were up 47 pct to 19.4p. the
annual shareholder meeting will be held in london on april 29.
ccl industries purchases stake in monobloc
&lt;ccl industries inc> said it purchased a
majority interest in monobloc u.s.a. from envases metalurgicos
ccl also said it agreed to exchange present and future
paris group publishing daily franc tin price
the association of white metals has
decided to publish a daily tin price here in french francs per
100 kilos, the french federation of non-ferrous metals said.
the price, quoted for the first time yesterday, was
introduced as the lack of tin quotes was causing problems for
some french companies, a spokesman for the non-ferrous metals
today's price was set at 4,776 francs per 100 kilos and
the international chamber of commerce stopped publishing a
tin price after the london metal exchange (lme) stopped tin
the association has tested the basis it uses to calculate a
french franc price over the last few months to ensure it was
the french franc price is pre-tax, for specified quality, a
minimum 99.9 pct purity, at a french port or border railway
station and a minimum delivery of 10 tonnes.
the french federation of non-ferrous metals groups various
metal associations including the association of white metals.
qtly div nine cts vs nine cts prior
madeira in letter of intent to be acquired
signed a letter of intent to be acquired by tradevest inc
after completion of the transaction, tradevest would own 90
pct of the issued outstanding stock of madeira.
declared a one-for-10 reverse stock split of its common stock.
it said the split will be payable april 17 to shareholders
&lt;montedison spa> of italy said net
consolidated profit for its agrimont group, formed in june
1986, totalled 1.5 billion lire in 1986.
agrimont spa, the holding company for montedison's
agro-industrial businesses, had sales of 810 billion lire and a
net profit of about 1.1 billion lire, after amortization costs
of 35 billion lire and a 13 billion lire reduction in the value
of inventory due to falling market prices, montedison said.
agrimont, still wholly owned by montedison, is taking steps
to be traded on the milan exchange, the company said.
the company said that 1986 was characterized by an unstable
fertlizer market due to the weak dollar and the decline of
international prices for products sold in europe and the u.s
where agrimont operates through its conserv division.
in pesticides and in animal health care products agrimont
maintained its previous level of revenues and market share in
montedison said it named ettore dell'isola to the newly
created position of president of agrimont.
montedison also said it named renato picco, managing
director of &lt;eridania spa> and gianfranco ceroni, managing
director of &lt;italiana olii e sifi>, both of whom are members
of the the ferruzzi group's management board, to argimont's
board of directors. ferruzzi owns about 40 pct of montedison,
datron &lt;datr> agrees to buyout by officers
datron corp said it agreed to
merge with ggfh inc, a florida-based company formed by the four
according to terms of the proposed transaction, each share
of datron common stock, excluding those shares owned by the
four officers, will be bought for six dlrs a share, it said.
datron's officers hold about 73 pct of the total 896,000
upon completion of the proposed transaction, the officers
of datron would own 100 pct of the company. the merger is
subject to gghf's receiving financing for the plan, datron
shareholders of datron will be asked to approve the plan at
their annual meeting to be held in june or july, and the merger
is expected to be completed by july 31, it said.
trump and interstate properties in talks to acquire alexanders
trump and interstate properties in talks to acquire alexanders
sound warehouse inc &lt;swhi> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
shr 26 cts vs 52 cts
revs 47.7 mln vs 38.5 mln
shr 52 cts vs 97 cts
revs 116.9 mln vs 97 mln
trump and interstate in talks for alexanders
said they were holding preliminary discussions regarding a
possible joint acquisition of alexanders inc at 47 dlrs per
the possible acquisition is subject to any applicable real
estate gains and transfer taxes, the joint statement said.
trump and interstate, which presently own about 40 pct of
alexander's common stock, said they intend to keep the company
as a retailer if they succed in their acquisition.
there can be no assurances that the parties will reach any
agreement regarding an acquisition or what price might be
japan buys 4,000 tonnes canadian rapeseed
japan bought 4,000 tonnes of canadian
rapeseed overnight at an undisclosed price for last half
may/first half june shipment, trade sources said.
telecrafter corp &lt;swhi> 2nd qtr feb 28 net
shr profit 12 cts vs loss 14 cts
net profit 183,000 vs loss 234,000
revs 2.4 mln vs 1.5 mln
shr profit 22 cts vs loss 22 cts
net profit 345,000 vs loss 358,000
revs 5.2 mln vs 2.9 mln
note:1987 2nd qtr and six months include gains of 78,000
dlrs and 154,000 dlrs for tax loss carryforward.
tunisia expected to tender for french wheat
tunisia is expected to tender april 14 for
100,000 tonnes of french soft wheat for delivery between may
and august and which would be covered by the french export
credit agency, coface, export credits, traders said here.
no official tender has been announced yet by tunisia, they
france has sold a total of 200,000 tonnes of soft wheat to
tunisia since the begining of the current campaign which was
covered by coface export credits. of this amount, a total of
150,000 tonnes was exported by march 1, they said.
colt industries inc &lt;cot> 1st qtr net
shr 28 cts vs 16 cts
revs 410.1 mln vs 393.5 mln
avg shrs 35.4 mln vs 164.7 mln
note: 1987 net reflects interest expense on debt incurred
to finance recapitalization in oct. 1986. prior year earnings
yankee &lt;ynk> unit not to sell subsidiary
yankee cos inc said its eskey
inc &lt;esk> subsidiary has decided not to sell its yale e. key
mayfair super markets inc &lt;myfra> 2nd qtr feb 28
shr 59 cts vs 46 cts
net 2.4 mln vs 1.9 mln
revs 122.5 mln vs 105.9 mln
shr 1.13 dlrs vs 84 cts
net 4.5 mln vs 3.4 mln
revs 242.5 mln vs 210.1 mln
note: 1986 share adjusted for 2-for-1 stock split.
&lt;baton broadcasting inc> six mths feb 28 net
shr 33 cts vs 31 cts
revs 112.0 mln vs 95.4 mln
united cable television corp &lt;uct> 3rd qtr net
shr loss 24 cts vs profit seven cts
net loss 5,952,000 vs profit 2,078,000
revs 55.9 mln vs 50.6 mln
avg shrs 25.2 mln vs 24.7 mln
shr loss 11 cts vs profit 24 cts
net loss 2,673,000 vs profit 6,800,000
revs 162.6 mln vs 143.9 mln
avg shrs 25.0 mln vs 24.4 mln
note: current year net both periods includes pretax charge
seven mln dlrs from increase in reserve for investments in
broadcast television entities and tax credits of 1,002,000 dlrs
in quarter and 520,000 dlrs in nine mths.
canada allows publishing takeover by harcourt
investment canada said it has allowed the
indirect takeover of holt, rinehart and winston canada ltd.,
w.b. saunders co of canada ltd and les editions hrw ltd by
the government agency said, however, harcourt canada has
agreed to sell control of the firms to canadian interests
harcourt canada's u.s. parent, harcourt brace jovanovich
inc &lt;hbj>, indirectly acquired the canadian book publishing
companies when it purchased holt rinehart and winston from cbs
the largest u.s. textile maker focused
on its own business as its competitors found merger partners,
but now burlington industries inc may have restructured itself
into an attractive takeover candidate, analysts said.
the takeover spotlight fell today on burlington, which rose
4-7/8 to 52-7/8 on speculation that investor asher edelman and
dominion textiles inc of canada bought an almost five pct
a published report said edelman and dominion jointly
acquired a stake in burlington and were weighing a takeover
offer. edelman would not comment, and a spokesman for
montreal-based dominion called the report just "rumors."
burlington said it did not know if the report was true.
wall street professionals said they were not convinced of
the story or that edelman and dominion would be the victors if
arbitragers said past comments from dominion, however,
added credence to the speculation. dominion has said that it
was looking for a takeover in the u.s.
last year, dominion unsuccessfully bid for avondale mills
and has maintained a 120 mln dlr line of credit to be used for
a dominion spokesman said canada's largest textile producer
has been negotiating with "many" u.s. textile companies, but
would not say whether burlington was among them.
"there have been acquisitions in this area. it's not
unusual that someone could be looking at burlington after the
housecleaning they've done," said eileen gormley of thomson
burlington sold its domestic operations, which made sheets
and other linens, to j.p. stevens and co inc for 110 mln dlrs
last year. it also has reorganized management, and focused its
operations on businesses that would be less affected by foreign
"they've pulled back so as not to be a commodity marketer,"
said gormley. she said in moving more heavily into industrial
fabrics, burlington bought c.h. masland, which supplies carpets
and other fabric to the auto industry.
"in the past, they just spent and never realized the return
on the outlays they did make," she said.
"you look at their record over the year, and i think
they're poised to be more profitable than they had been in the
she estimated 1987 earnings of 2.50 dlrs per share, up
some analysts today recommended clients not buy burlington
edward johnson of johnson redbook said he recommends
selling. he said he believes the stock is worth only about 50
dlrs on a takeover basis and about 46 dlrs on an earnings
some arbitragers, however, said takeover values have been
placed on the company of 60 to 65 dlrs per share.
"after asher's (edelman) recent history, a lot of people
don't find him very credible anymore," said one arbitrager.
another, however, said edelman succeeds in forcing
managements to take steps to enhance shareholder values even if
he doesn't win the target company.
edelman was unsuccessful last year in offers for lucky
stores inc and fruehauf corp. he did succeed in buying
the stocks of other textile makers rose along with
j.p. stevens &lt;stn> climbed 5/8 to 44-7/8, and fieldcrest
cannon inc &lt;fld>, the result of a merger of fieldcrest and
cannon, rose 1-1/8 to 39-3/4. west point-pepperell inc &lt;wpm>
sterivet laboratories ltd &lt;stvtf> 1st qtr net
shr profit 10 cts vs loss 17 cts
net profit 206,000 vs loss 281,000
sterivet laboratories ltd &lt;stvtf> year loss
shr loss 48 cts vs loss 19 cts
net loss 746,000 vs loss 342,000
japan in last-ditch effort to avert tariffs
open talks with american trade negotiators in a last-ditch
effort to avert new high u.s. tariffs to be imposed on a wide
makoto kuroda, vice minister of japan's ministry of
international trade and industry (miti), is to hold two days of
meetings with the deputy u.s. trade representative, michael
smith, and the under secretary of commerce, bruce smart.
the new tariffs, to go into effect on april 17, are in
retaliation for japan's failure to adhere to an agreement to
end dumping semiconductors in world markets at below cost and
to open its home market to u.s. semiconductor shipments.
they are to be imposed on goods which use semiconductors,
including television and audio equipment and computers.
both u.s. and japanese officials have said there was little
likelihood the talks would do anything to avert the 100 pct
duties on 300 mln dlrs worth of japanese shipments.
president reagan announced the planned tariffs on march 27
after he said that close monitoring of the july 1986
u.s.-japanese semiconductor pact convinced u.s. officials that
japan was not honoring the agreement.
in making the annoucement, reagan said "i am committed to
the full enforcement of our trade agreements designed to
provide american industry with free and fair trade."
trade analysts said his move was aimed as much at japan's
semiconductor trade practices, which are said to have injured
the u.s. semiconductor industry, as congress, which has
complained about presidential timidity on trade issues.
congressional democrats have pledged to enact aggressive
trade laws to counter what they contend has been reagan's
inaction to redress the growing u.s. trade deficit, which last
about one-third of the deficit was with japan.
reagan said there were recent signs japan was beginning to
adhere to the pact and that was why he was not terminating it.
kuroda said on leaving tokyo today he had no new proposals
but did have an explanation of the semiconductor situation.
he told the daily newspaper ashai shimbun that reagan's
decision was based on inaccurate data and an exaggerated sense
of miti's power to control japanese traders.
"the united states has excessive expectations.," he said. to
stabilize supply-demand relations which have been disrupted by
excess inventories since 1985 will take some time."
he also said that u.s. firms had not been aggressive enough
in trying to sell in the japanese market.
hoechst celanese sends report on new facilities
sent propsective customers a confidential report describing its
polyester textile fiber facilities in north carolina and south
the company did not disclose any prices.
the report describes the facilities in darlington county,
s.c., and fayetteville, n.c., the company said. the report also
decribes related manufacturing, marketing, administrative and
technical resources that could be made avialable to a buyer.
hoechst celanese was formed feb 27 by the merger of
celanese corp and american hoechst corp. the merger took place
after an agreement was reached with the federal trade
commission that certain domestic polyester textile fiber assets
of the combined companies would be divested, it said.
hoechst celanese said it has the option of divesting either
the south carolina facilities of the former american hoechst or
a package of polyester textile fiber facilities of the former
mellon participating mortgage trust &lt;mpmts> div
qtly div 25 cts vs 25 cts prior
u.k. gec declines comment on u.s. purchase rumour
general electric co plc &lt;gecl.l> (gec)
declined comment on rumours on the london stock market that it
is planning another purchase in the u.s. medical equipment
field, in addition to its existing u.s. subsidiary &lt;picker
a gec spokesman said that it is company policy not to
stock exchange traders said the rumour helped gec's share
price to rise 5p, to a final 206p from yesterday's closing
preston corp &lt;ptrk> sees first quarter loss
preston corp said it expects to
report a loss of about 300,000 dlrs or five cts per share for
the first quarter, compared with a profit of 1,081,000 dlrs or
19 cts per share a year before.
the trucking company attributed the loss to the continued
rate of discounted in its primary markets, flat revenues and
increased costs, including uninsured claims expense resulting
from adverse weather conditions during the last three months.
it said results outside the northeast were strong, and it
expects to show improved results for the rest of the year.
white house standing firm on japanese sanctions
fitzwater said u.s. trade sanctions against japan were likely
take effect on april 17 in spite of a "full court press" by
"all indications are they will take effect," he said.
"i would say japan is applying the full court press ... they
certainly are putting both feet forward in terms of explaining
he noted high level meetings on the trade dispute are
underway here but said, "i don't think there's anything i can
report and i don't believe there's been any official movement."
dow jones and co inc first quarter shr 69 cts vs 64 cts
dow jones and co inc first quarter shr 69 cts vs 64 cts
shr 30 cts vs 28 cts
revs 125.2 mln vs 123.9 mln
note: 52 pct-owned by dana corp &lt;dcn>.
cocoa terminal deposits to be cut 25 pct - icch
the basic deposit on cocoa futures
contracts will be reduced by 25 pct as from friday, april 10,
taking the required deposit for one 10 tonne lot to 300 stg
from 400 previously, a spokesman for the international
the deposit for spread contracts will be similarly cut, to
150 stg for a one 10 tonne lot from 200 previously, he said.
the icch had been looking at cocoa market fluctuations over
a period of weeks, he said, adding the market's basic stability
had warranted a cut in deposit rates.
the decision to cut deposits was taken by the icch after
consultation with the london cocoa terminal market, the
the cuts were likely to attract more business to the
electro rent corp &lt;elrc> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
shr 20 cts vs 32 cts
revs 27.1 mln vs 26.2 mln
shr 68 cts vs 1.05 dlrs
revs 82.6 mln vs 78.8 mln
walgreen co 2nd qtr shr 62 cts vs 58 cts
walgreen co 2nd qtr shr 62 cts vs 58 cts
judy's inc &lt;judy> 4th qtr jan 31 loss
shr loss two cts vs profit nine cts
net loss 74,000 vs profit 418,000
sales 18.2 mln vs 17.5 mln
shr profit nine cts vs profit 26 cts
net profit 426,000 vs profit 1,170,000
sales 58.7 mln vs 56.7 mln
orange-co inc &lt;oj> 2nd qtr feb 28 net
shr profit 2.26 dlrs vs loss 81 cts
net profit 9,785,000 vs loss 3,422,000
revs 26.0 mln vs 18.9 mln
shr profit 2.75 dlrs vs loss 1.07 dlrs
net profit 11.9 mln vs loss 4,486,000
revs 39.0 mln vs 37.2 mln
note: current year net both periods includes gain 9,500,000
dlrs from sale of orange-co of florida subsidiary to american
net includes pretax real estate disposition loss 920,000
dlrs vs gain 52,000 dlrs in quarter and loss 863,000 dlrs vs
prior year net includes tax credits of 2,132,000 dlrs in
quarter and 3,039,000 dlres in half.
current half net includes 2,051,000 dlr pretax gain
2,051,000 dlrs from change in accounting.
dow jones and co inc &lt;dj> 1st qtr net
shr 69 cts vs 64 cts
rev 285.6 mln vs 259.7 mln
note: earnings include after-tax gain of 29.4 mln dlrs, or
30 cts a share, versus after-tax gain of 31.4 mln dlrs, or 32
cts a share, for 1986 first quarter. earnings per share
reflects a 50 pct stock dividend in the form of a class b
common stock distribution on june 30, 1986.
lord abbett and co mutual fund dividends
qtly div 28 cts vs 29 cts prior
lord abbett u.s. government securities fund
daily div 2.9 cts vs 2.9 cts prior
lord abbett tax free income fund national series
daily div 6.7 cts vs 6.7 cts prior
lord abbett tax free income new york series
daily div 6.7 cts vs 6.7 cts prior
lord abbett tax free income texas series
daily div 5.9 cts vs 5.9 cts prior
lord abbett california tax free income
daily div of 6.2 cts vs 6.2 cts prior
heineken sees higher profits, wider penetration
dutch brewer heineken nv said it hoped
to maintain for a number of years a similar earnings growth to
the 7.5 pct increase in net profit achieved in 1986, despite
continuing investments in a reorganization program and efforts
heineken last month reported a 1986 net profit of 285 mln
guilders, after 265 mln in 1985.
chairman freddie heineken said the company, europe's
leading beer producer with six pct of market share in 1986,
said sales increased by 6.3 pct to 42.1 mln hectoliters.
the volume increase was due mainly to a rise in the u.s.,
where the brand amstel lite saw great demand, and in europe,
where sales accounted for 25.5 pct of the total.
turnover, despite losses in guilder terms due to weaker
foreign currencies, rose by 4.4 pct, to 6.7 billion guilders.
further consolidation of foreign companies, including the
increase of its stake in leading spanish brewery &lt;el aguila
s.a.> to 51.2 pct, new ventures and modernization, particularly
in french and spanish interests, eroded profit margins. the
company still planned to invest 700 mln guilders this year in
heineken's spanish activities should start yielding profit
next year, heineken said, adding that its french operations had
already turned to profit after vast rationalization last year.
vice chairman gerard van schaik said the decision by the
european court of justice in luxembourg to allow foreign beer
into the closed west german market -- europe's biggest beer
market -- offered interesting possibilities for heineken. "we
have the beer, but distribution and sales is the important
point," van schaik said, adding that since the ruling heineken
had been inundated by german traders seeking joint ventures.
"the question is not if we want to penetrate the german
market, but how we are to do it," van schaik said, adding that
while the widely traveled germans seemed to be developing a
taste for foreign beer, the internal structure was very
heineken board member hans coebergh, responsible for
african operations, said he saw africa as one of the most
important beer growth markets in the long term.
he said the company, present in africa since 1932 and with
majority stakes in six breweries and interests in 25, was
hampered by the lack of hard currencies there.
africa, where beer consumption averages only nine liters
per head per year and sales are limited by import restrictions
and currency risks, nonetheless accounted for 6.5 pct of total
on-site production is rendered expensive by the high price
of imports of essential ingredients. but heineken scientists
have been looking at other possibilities.
to balance the costs of imported malt, heinken launched on
the nigerian market a new beer made of 50 pct sorghum, which
heineken is urging farmers to grow the traditional raw
materials, but coebergh noted that banana and palm beer were
popular in rwanda . "this is a possibility, but we could not
possibly achieve the heineken flavor," coebergh said.
chairman heineken said the company's seven year efforts to
penetrate the soviet market had finally resulted this week in a
contract that relaxed some of the restrictions they faced.
but again, a lack of hard currencies limited heineken's
market potential. heineken now has seven bars in moscow that
are enjoying good sales, but the bars only accept western
walgreen co &lt;wag> votes quarterly dividend
qtly div 13-1/2 cts vs 12-1/2 cts prior qtr
colombia business asked to diversify from coffee
a colombia government trade official has
urged the business community to aggressively diversify its
activities and stop relying so heavily on coffee.
samuel alberto yohai, director of the foreign trade
institute, incomex, said private businessmen should not become
what he called "mental hostages" to coffee, traditionally
the national planning department forecast that in 1987
coffee will account for only one-third of total exports, or
about 1.5 billion dlrs, with oil and energy products making up
another third and non-traditional exports the remainder.
turkey calls for dialogue to solve dispute
turkey said today its disputes with
greece, including rights on the continental shelf in the aegean
sea, should be solved through negotiations.
a foreign ministry statement said the latest crisis between
the two nato members stemmed from the continental shelf dispute
and an agreement on this issue would effect the security,
economy and other rights of both countries.
"as the issue is basicly political, a solution can only be
found by bilateral negotiations," the statement said. greece has
repeatedly said the issue was legal and could be solved at the
the two countries approached armed confrontation last month
after greece announced it planned oil exploration work in the
aegean and turkey said it would also search for oil.
a face-off was averted when turkey confined its research to
territorrial waters. "the latest crises created an historic
opportunity to solve the disputes between the two countries,"
turkey's ambassador in athens, nazmi akiman, was due to
meet prime minister andreas papandreou today for the greek
reply to a message sent last week by turkish prime minister
turgut ozal. the contents of the message were not disclosed.
frontier insurance &lt;frtr> in acquisition talks
said it is currently negotiating to acquire the business of
medical quadrangle inc, formerly its largest medical
malpractice insurance producer, and the business of its other
malpractice producer, medical professional liability agency
frontier insurance group inc &lt;frtr> 4th qtr net
oper shr 25 cts vs six cts
oper shr 97 cts vs 53 cts
revs 28.8 mln vs 18.5 mln
note: net excludes investment gain four cts shr vs loss six
cts in quarter and gain five cts vs loss six cts in year.
gatt official meets with u.s. farm leaders
agricultural matters in the new round of global trade talks is
in washington today and tomorrow to meet with congressional and
aart de zeeuw, chairman of the general agreement on tariffs
and trade's negotiating group on agriculture, met this morning
with members of the house agriculture committee.
committee sources said de zeeuw expressed concern over
protectionism and high farm price supports. house lawmakers
noted that in 1985 the united states took steps to reduce loan
"members told him (de zeeuw) that we lowered our (u.s.) loan
rates and can't eliminate subsidies unilaterally," one source
de zeeuw was told of the u.s. lawmakers' frustration with
japan's restrictive rice import policy, and members defended
the u.s. dairy policy, which aims to cut surplus production by
subsidizing producers to trim herds, sources said.
later today de zeeuw will meet the senate agriculture
members and undersecretary of state affairs allen wallis.
tomorrow, de zeeuw is to meet the house ways and means
trade subcommittee and the senate finance committee, before
de zeeuw goes to canada later this week. his trip to north
america is part of his attempt to meet farm policy leaders in
the negotiating group on agriculture held its first meeting
in february and is expected to meet again in may.
southington savings bank &lt;ssbb> 1st qtr net
shr 39 cts vs not given
note: company went public in july 1986.
caterpillar inc &lt;cat> votes quarterly dividend
qtly div 12-1/2 cts vs 12-1/2 cts prior qtr
corrected - datron &lt;datr> agrees to buyout
datron corp said it agreed to
merge with gghf inc, a florida-based company formed by the four
according to terms of the proposed transaction, each share
of datron common stock, excluding those shares owned by the
four officers, will be converted into six dlrs a share, it
datron's officers hold about 73 pct of the total 896,000
datron common shares outstanding, it said.
(corrects company name, gghf, in first paragraph)
walgreen co &lt;wag> 2nd qtr feb 28 net
shr 62 cts vs 58 cts
qtly div 13-1/2 cts vs 13-1/2 cts prior
net 38.8 mln vs 35.7 mln
revs 1.18 billion vs one billion
shr 84 cts vs 86 cts
net 52 mln vs 52.9 mln
revs 2.14 billion vs 1.82 billion
note: results include charge of four cts shr for latest six
mths vs credit of five cts shr for prior six mths from
dividend payable june 12, record may 21
j.p. morgan&lt;jpm> says dlr may prevent fed easing
the relatively high level of real u.s.
interest rates suggests that there is scope for further
declines in money market rates, but the federal reserve is
unlikely to promote such a drop as long as the dollar remains
volatile, said j.p. morgan and co inc chairman lewis preston.
he said in response to a reporter's question after the
bank's annual meeting that money market rates could decline
further but, "i don't think the fed is going to encourage that
as long as the exchange markets are as volatile as they are."
on the other hand, he said that, barring a collapse of the
dollar, he did not see rates going much higher.
he said that morgan's recent rise in its prime lending rate
was "purely a reflection of an increase in a whole spectrum of
preston reiterated earlier company forecasts that the u.s.
economy should show roughly 2.5 to three pct real growth this
he also said that as a consequence of the dollar's decline
and oil price rises, inflation would rise "moderately" to a 3.5
to four pct rate in 1987.
medtronic &lt;mdt> sees 15 pct earnings growth
medtronic inc said it sees 15 pct
growth in sales and earnings for the year ending april 30,
at an analysts meeting here the company said that for the
year ending april 30, 1987 it will earn about 73 mln dlrs, or
about 5.15-5.35 dlrs a share on sales of about 500 mln dlrs.
in the year ago period, the company earned 53.4 mln dlrs,
or 3.65 dlrs a share, on sales of 402.8 mln dlrs.
winston wallin, medtronic chairman, said the company will
improve market share in fiscal 1988 in cardiac pacemakers and
expand its cardiovascular therapeutic product line.
wallin cautioned analysts not to quickly change their per
share estimates for the company as he said medtronic will have
heavy sales and marketing expenses in fiscal 1988.
he said the company intends to reinvest its earnings in its
businesses and not in its dividends. "shareholders are better
off if we grow the business rather than reinvest in dividends
wallin said he sees medtronic's share of the total
worldwide pacemaker market increasing to 42 pct in fiscal 1988,
from 40 pct in fiscal 1987.
he said the worldwide market for cardiovascualr therapeutic
products, which includes pacemakers, valves, catheters and
lasers, will be valued at about 2.5 billion dlrs 1990 and will
wallin said, "our objective is to get a hold of new
products and start building market share if we have to beg,
borrow or steal to get into new markets."
in the past, medtronic's pacemakers have been plagued with
a number of problems leading to product recalls. regulators
also have criticized the industry, citing quality problems and
"we have no knowledge of any major problems in our
pacemakers or leads," wallin said. "we intend to re-establish
our company as the quality leader in the industry."
glen nelson, executive vice president for medtronics, said
the company intends to diversify internally and through
acquisitions of companies in areas of medtronic's expertise,
wallin said the 15 pct earnings growth for fiscal 1988 does
not include dilutions from acquisitions. "we hope to have some
safety provisions so that we won't have any major dilutions
wallin also said the company will have virtual exclusivity
in rate responsive pacemakers for all of fiscal 1988.
the company markets activitrax, the first single chamber
pacemaker that varies heartrate in response to physical
siemens ag, a west german company, is also developing a
spie batignolles could increase comstock holding
negotiating to increase its holding in u.s. engineering and
spie batignolles, a subsidiary of schneider sa &lt;schn.pa>,
said in a statement it was negotiating to invest 20 mln dlrs in
comstock in the form of bonds convertible into shares.
spie batignolles has held a 20 pct stake in comstock since
february 1986. a spokesman said if spie batignolles converted
all the new bonds, it could open the way for the french company
to take control of comstock but he gave no other details.
talks continue on tin agreement extension
discussions on the possible extension of
the sixth international tin agreement (ita) began at the
quarterly session of the international tin council (itc) but
the council is still waiting for decisions from various member
a number of producer governments in particular have not
decided their final position on whether the ita should be
extended for up to two years or wound down after it expires on
june 30, according to delegate sources.
earlier today european community (ec) members decided to
back an extension, with the exception of britain, which
undertook to communicate its decision to its ec partners later.
delegates said it could be friday before all the member
countries declare their positions on the possible extension.
today's full council session started shortly before 1500 gmt
after the scheduled 1330 start was delayed by an ec
the council reconvenes at 0930 gmt tomorrow, although
delegates said the morning is likely to be taken up with minor
technical matters and the main issue will probably not be
pakistan cotton crop seen record 7.6 mln bales
pakistan is likely to produce a record
7.6 mln bales (375 lbs each) of cotton from the current 1986/87
crop, exceeding a target of 7.2 mln bales, food and agriculture
he told a pakistan central cotton committee meeting here
the present was the third consecutive poroduction
record-setting year and said the momentum would be accelerated
in the future, the official app news agency reported.
baluch said indications were that pakistan is to attain a
record cotton production of 7.6 mln bales, compared to the
1985/86 crop of 7.2 mln bales which also represented the target
earlier set by authorities for this year's production.
tranzonic cos &lt;tnz> 4th qtr feb 28 net
shr 54 cts vs 24 cts
sales 15.2 mln vs 13.0 mln
shr two dlrs vs 1.64 dlrs
sales 58.6 mln vs 54.0 mln
security pacific expects brazil loan action to cut net by 7.2 mln dlrs
security pacific expects brazil loan action to cut net by 7.2 mln dlrs
white house says japanese tarriffs likely
the white house said high u.s.
tariffs on japanese electronic goods would likely be imposed as
scheduled on april 17, despite an all-out effort by japan to
presidential spokesman marlin fitzwater made the remark one
day before u.s. and japanese officials are to meet under the
emergency provisions of a july 1986 semiconductor pact to
discuss trade and the punitive tariffs.
fitzwater said: "i would say japan is applying the
full-court press...they certainly are putting both feet forward
in terms of explaining their position." but he added that "all
indications are they (the tariffs) will take effect."
showboat &lt;sbo> to take charge, sees 3rd qtr loss
charge of 19 to 20 mln dlrs pretax against results for the
third quarter ended march 31, director and assistant to the
president j. kell houssels iii told reuters.
he said the charge results from pre-operating expenses of
its recently-opened atlantic city, n.j., showboat hotel, casino
and bowling center and will cause a loss for the third quarter
and probably for all of fiscal 1987 as well.
but houssels said showboat's earnings for fiscal 1988
should show a sharp increase from fiscal 1986 levels due to the
contribution of the new atlantic city facility.
showboat earned 1,753,000 dlrs in last year's third
quarter.  for all of fiscal 1986 it earned 5,769,000 dlrs.
houssels said showboat since the opening of the atlantic
city hotel/casino, showboat has had to start charging interest
expenses connected with debt it sold to finance the facility
directly against income rather than capitalizing the interest
as it had been able to do previously.
showboat opened the hotel during its third quarter and
gaming began last thursday on a regular basis after test gaming
was completed earlier in the week.
security pacific &lt;spc> loans put on non-accrual
security pacific corp said it is
placing medium and long-term loans to brazil and ecuador on a
non-accrual basis as of march 31, a move that will reduce first
quarter earnings by 7.2 mln dlrs, or nine cts per share, after
despite the anticipated reduction to quarterly earnings,
security pacific said it still expects to report first quarter
earnings higher than the 88 mln dlrs, or 1.11 dlrs per share
reported for the first quarter of 1986.
the bank holding company said the action affects 401 mln
dlrs of loans to brazil and 73 mln of loans to ecuador.
brazil suspended interest payments on its 68 billion dlrs
of medium- and long-term debt on february 20.
ecuador, which has foreign debt of roughly eight billion
dlrs, has not paid any interest to foreign banks since
in march ecuador said it would suspend interest payments
for the rest of the year because of an earthquake which halted
the export of oil, which accounts for about 75 pct the
in its announcement, security pacific said it will record
interest income only as it is received in cash.
the company also said it believes that brazil will reach an
agreement with its banks and that interest payments will resume
the brazilian negotiations resume on friday in new york
when central bank governor francisco gros is expected to ask
banks for a 90-day roll-over of some 9.5 billion dlrs of term
debt that matures on april 15.
iraqi troops reported pushing back iranians
iraq said today its troops were pushing
iranian forces out of positions they had initially occupied
when they launched a new offensive near the southern port of
a high command communique said iraqi troops had won a
significant victory and were continuing to advance.
iraq said it had foiled a three-pronged thrust some 10 km
(six miles) from basra, but admitted the iranians had occupied
ground held by the mohammed al-qassem unit, one of three
the communique said iranian revolutionary guards were under
assault from warplanes, helicopter gunships, heavy artillery
"our forces are continuing their advance until they purge
the last foothold" occupied by the iranians, it said.
(iran said its troops had killed or wounded more than 4,000
iraqis and were stabilising their new positions.)
the baghdad communique said iraqi planes also destroyed oil
installations at iran's southwestern ahvaz field during a raid
today. it denied an iranian report that an iraqi jet was shot
iraq also reported a naval battle at the northern tip of
the gulf. iraqi naval units and forces defending an offshore
terminal sank six iranian out of 28 iranian boats attempting to
attack an offshore terminal, the communique said.
golden enterprises inc &lt;gldc> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
shr 15 cts vs nine cts
qtly div six cts vs six cts in prior qtr
revs 29.2 mln vs 29.3 mln
avg shrs 13.1 mln vs 13.0 mln
shr 49 cts vs 36 cts
revs 92.2 mln vs 88.2 mln
avg shrs 13.1 mln vs 13.0 mln
note: dividend is payable april 30 to holders of record
a meeting of finance ministers and
central bankers of the group of five ended after nearly three
west german finance minister gerhard stoltenberg and
british chancellor of the exchequer nigel lawson declined to
comment on the meeting as they emerged from the u.s. treasury.
a european monetary official said the ministers of the
group of seven countries would gather at about three p.m. local
usda to propose foreign meat inspection rule
preparing a proposal that would require all foreign meat
products to be inspected at their point of arrival in the
united states, a usda official said.
donald houston, administrator of usda's food safety and
inspection service, fsis, told a house agriculture subcommittee
usda was developing a proposed change in regulations that would
put an end to the current practice of permitting foreign meat
products to be unloaded at one port and inspected at another
houston said the requirement would be phased in over
several years to "avoid disruptions and economic hardship."
union texas oil reserves dropped in 1986
union texas petroleum said its worldwide
proved reserves fell to 511 mln barrels of oil equivalent at
the end of 1986 from 555 mln barrels reported in 1985.
in its newly released annual report, union texas said it
replaced about 71 pct of its production of 56 mln barrels of
oil equivalent last year after taking into account the sale of
27 mln barrels of u.s. reserves.
union texas, the nation's largest independent oil and gas
producer based on revenues, is a privately-held company owned
by kohlberg kravis roberts and co and allied-signal inc &lt;ald>.
the houston-based company said it lost 57.5 mln dlrs on
1.26 billion dlrs in sales last year, compared to profits of
165 mln dlrs on 2.04 billion dlrs in sales in 1985.
union texas said it received an average of 13.35 dlrs per
barrel for its international oil production and 2.99 dlrs per
mcf for its foreign natural gas sales. the majority of the
company's total energy production is in the united kingdom,
in the united states, union texas said it completed
evaluation work on its oil find in alaska's colville delta
"although significant oil reserves were confirmed,
development of this discovery will not be economical without
substantially higher prices," the company said.
union texas said it planned to spend about 42 mln dlrs over
the next two years to develop its eugene island block 371 in
in 1987, the company said it budgeted 178 mln dlrs for
capital spending, less than half of the amount spent in 1985
and down from 199 mln dlrs budgeted last year. union texas also
said it would seek acquisitions of oil and gas properties as
ual &lt;ual> may respond to pilots today
ual inc may have a response this
afternoon to the pilots union proposal to buy its united
airlines unit, a ual spokesman said.
"obviously, we have a lot of movement in our stock, and we
need to get a clarification out," the spokesman said, adding
that there was a "50-50" chance a statement would be released
the pilots earlier this week offered to buy the airline for
2.3 billion dlrs, and assume 2.2 billion dlrs of existing debt.
takeover speculation has driven ual's stock for several
weeks. ual last month said new york real estate developer
donald trump held a position in its stock, and that he also
the developer indicated in those talks that he took the
position as an investment, but he revealed no other plans.
today, rumors circulated that coniston partners were buying
ual stock. ual jumped five to 70-3/4 on volume of more than 3.2
"united has got to consider this proposal. i think the
pilot's proposal is realistic. i don't exptect them to take it,
but it could put some interesting options in front of ual
management," said timothy pettee, bear stearns and co analyst.
analysts have said ual made itself vulnerable to attack
when it diversified away from its core airline. it added hertz
rental cars, westin and hilton international hotels in a
strategy to become a travel service company.
the strategy left its stock in a slump and its pilots union
concerned that the company was not focussing enough attention
ual has stood firm on its strategy. it is emphasizing its
new focus by changing its name to allegis, as of may one.
but takeover speculation has escalated, and wall street has
been busy calculating break up values well in excess of 100
dlrs per share. traders today described the buying in ual as
widespread, indicative to them that big institutions believe
market sources have said that although trump attracted
attention to the stock, the pilots proposal acted as a
catalyst, kicking off a new round of speculation and perhaps
throwing the company into the hands of another buyer.
"the first domino is you have an investor with a
considerable stake. the second domino is the union. that type
of attitude has been a precursor to airline deals in the past,"
"what's interesting is the values are there. there's
hartmarx corp, following a year of
restructuring, continues to target record earnings for fiscal
1987, chairman john meinert told the annual meeting.
meinert reiterated an earlier comment that earnings for the
remainder of the year must double the 1986 level to meet that
goal. in fiscal 1986, ended november 30, 1986, hartmarx
reported earnings of 24.8 mln dlrs, or 1.20 dlrs a share, down
from the prior year's 42.7 mln dlrs, or 2.25 dlrs a share.
the 110-year-old apparel manufacturer recently posted
first-quarter earnings of 54 cts a share, up from 40 cts a year
meinert told shareholders hartmarx has no plans to sell any
of its divisions. he added, "we have the financial capacity to
in 1987, meinert said the company will open five new and 10
redesigned kuppenheimer direct-to-consumer stores in atlanta,
detroit, st. louis, washington, d.c. and san francisco.
he said the company's women's apparel continues to grow,
and hartmarx has on the drawing board a briar concept store
which will feature ties, shirts and some tailored clothing.
fed's heller sees return to slower money supply growth
fed's heller sees return to slower money supply growth
general electric co 1st qtr shr 1.37 dlrs vs 1.18 dlrs
general electric co 1st qtr shr 1.37 dlrs vs 1.18 dlrs
ghana to buy crude oil from iran
ghana will import 15,000 tonnes of crude
oil annually from iran under an agreement reached in tehran
today, the iranian news agency irna reported.
the agency, received in london, said the accord was reached
between iranian oil minister gholamreza aqazadeh and a visiting
ghanaian delegation headed by foreign minister obed asamoah.
irna said that under the agreement, iran will also provide
technical and scientific assistance in manpower training and
fed's heller says monetary growth to be slower
robert heller, a member of the
federal reserve board, said he expects "more modest levels" of
growth in the money supply this year.
"in my view, this would not only be a logical, but also a
most desireable development," he said in a speech prepared for
delivery to an economic forum at chapman college in orange,
a text was released in washington.
he said the effect of lower inflation and financial
deregulation on monetary aggregates was now largely finished.
"consequently, monetary growth may return to more modest
levels," heller said. he noted growth in the money supply slowed
"i would not be surprised at all if the monetary aggregates
were to grow rather slowly during the balance of the year as
heller said there was a danger of renewed price inflation.
"the pricing behavior of american producers in response to
price increases of their foreign competitors will be crucial
for our economic future," he said.
widespread domestic price rises in response to rising
import prices would "generalize the inflationary forces
emanating from the foreign trade sector" and might not gain more
"a return to the stagflation of the late 1970s may well be
the result of such a behavior pattern," heller warned.
he said "we at the federal reserve will have to be
disciplined in our conduct of monetary policy."
heller said said the government should also exercise fiscal
discipline and cut the deficit by spending restraint rather
"the imposition of new taxes would tend to rekindle
inflation and certainly would not make us more competitive in
he said the u.s. economy should expand by nearly three pct
during 1987, aided by higher exports to europe and canada.
a free trade agreement currently being negotiated with
canada "would be exceedingly helpful in allowing american
producers to compete more effectively in that country," heller
general electric co &lt;ge> 1st qtr net
shr 1.37 dlrs vs 1.18 dlrs
net 624 mln vs 537 mln
sales 8.32 billion vs 5.88 billion
note: prior year does not include results of rca corp.
energy development &lt;edp> had year loss
it had an operating loss for the year ended december 31 of 2.4
mln dlrs, or 40 cts per share.
but it said a 41.5 mln dlr non-cash writeoff of oil and gas
properties taken in the first quarter resulted in a net loss of
43.9 mln dlrs, or 7.21 dlrs per share.
energy development partners, is a limited partnership which
full year revenues totaled 23.7 mln dlrs, the company also
it said proved reserves at december 31 totaled 4.8 mln
barrels of oil and 88 mln cubic feet of natural gas.
bankers of leading industrial nations reconvened here this
canadian finance minister michael wilson said on entering
the meeting the ministers would review the paris agreement.
asked if he was satisfied with west german and japanese
stimulus, wilson replied, "they could do a little more."
french finance minister edouard balladur, meanwhile,
confirmed there would be a communique at the end of the
finance ministers and central bankers of britain, france,
canada and west germany were seen by reuter correspondents
japanese officials and bundesbank president karl otto poehl
did not appear to have left the building at the end of earlier
group of five talks which broke up around 2 p.m. local time
there was no sign, however, of the italian delegation whose
position was thrown into question this morning by the
resignation of the christian democratic wing of italy's
european monetary officials said later that the italian
this meant that a full blown meeting of the group of seven
u.s. meat, poultry inspection called faulty
the u.s. meat and poultry inspection
programs are incapable of protecting consumers from
contaminated products, groups representing inspectors and
"the whole trend of inspection for the last 10 years has
been to corrupt and to degrade the system where today the
public is at constant risk to contaminated and adulterated
meat," kenneth blaylock, president of the american federation of
government employees, told a house agriculture subcommittee.
"the american consumer has little reason to feel confident
about the safety of meat and poultry being offered to him
today," said rodney leonard, executive director of the community
"company management is less concerned about the risk to
health than about raising plant output and company profits,"
leonard told a hearing of the house agriculture subcommittee on
kenneth morrison, staff associate at the government
accountability project, said inspectors consistently disclose
violations of federal law, demonstrating a "serious breakdown in
morrison told of chicken fat for flavoring being
contaminated by "intestines dragging in a water trough used to
flush away the condemned product, fecal material, human spit,
chewing gum and paper towels used by plant employees to blow
donald houston, administrator of the u.s. agriculture
department's food safety and inspection service, fsis, defended
the government's program, calling it "one of the most respected
public health programs in the world."
fsis inspects an estimated 127 mln head of cattle and 4.5
billion chicken and turkeys every year.
houston said inspection programs have kept pace with
change, but conceded that the danger of chemical residues in
the meat and poultry supply has increased.
he also said that, although he was confident the bacterium
salmonella eventually could be eradicated, it would take time
and much money to contain the growing problem.
salmonella, which in extreme cases can cause death, is
found in approximately 37 pct of u.s. broilers, 12 pct of raw
pork and three to five pct of raw beef, houston said.
the number of reported cases has doubled over the past 20
years, he said, to 40,000 cases annually.
"we certainly really have not found an effective means of
turning this disease around," said rep. james olin (d-va.)
the national research council recommended in 1985 that fsis
intensify efforts to develop rapid diagnostic procedures for
but the meat and poultry industries have said such controls
"hopefully we will not overreact by installing unnecessarily
complicated procedures that may become obstacles to the real
goal of providing an increasingly safer, more nutritious and
economical meat supply for consumers," stanley emerling,
executive vice president of the national association of meat
blaylock, speaking on behalf of food inspectors, said a new
program allowing elimination of usda inspection functions at
certain plants "voids the law in letter and spirit, and must be
repealed or we will see rising consumer fraud and an epidemic
of death and illness for which there will be no prevention nor
subcommittee chairman charles stenholm (d-tex.) said the
panel would hold a hearing on salmonella june 2.
chrysler &lt;c> renault delay am motors &lt;amo> pact
chrysler corp and regie natiionale des
usines renault said they agreed to extend by up to two weeks
the period for reaching definitive agreement on chrysler's
proposed 1.5 billion dlr takeover of american motors corp.
the letter of intent signed by chrysler and renault on
march nine set april nine as the target date for completing
however, the letter also allowed room for an extension of
that date to april 23 if an agreement could not be reached.
the two companies said they "now plan to complete work by
chrysler and renault said, "given the complex nature of the
deal, the need for additional time was to be expected."
the march letter of intent between the two companies says
that chrysler could ask renault to extend the agreement date
"in the event that prior to april 9, 1987, chrysler discovers
an unforeseen problem in the course of its 'due diligence'
investigation of the company," referring to american motors.
a chrysler spokeswoman would not say whether some problem
had cropped up in the talks. she stuck by the company's
statement that more time was needed because the talks are
complex. "that is our definition of the delay," she said.
under the previous agreement between chrysler and renault,
their letter of intent would be terminated on april nine or
when an agreement was reached. but the letter could be amendend
by a written agreement by both companies.
the chrysler spokeswoman said, "we are still working toward
a definitive agreement." said another chrysler official who is
not part of the talks but who would be told if the deal were in
analysts also downplayed the significance of the delay. "i
can't visualize where they wouldn't want it to be done," said
donaldson lufkin jenrette analyst richard henderson.
rite aid corp &lt;rad> sets dividend
qtly div 16-1/2 cts vs 16-1/2 cts
airsensors inc &lt;arsn> 3rd qtr jan 31 loss
shr loss five cts vs loss six cts
net loss 696,777 vs loss 598,095
shr loss 15 cts vs loss 17 cts
net loss 2,194,482 vs loss 1,751,884
canada plans to monitor steel imports, exports, trade minister says
canada plans to monitor steel imports, exports, trade minister says
general electric &lt;ge> 1st qtr helped by rca
first quarter results were significantly higher due to the
strong results of rca, which was acquired last year.
general electric also attibuted continued strong
performances in plastics, major appliances and the employers
reinsurance corp for its strong quarter.
ge recorded net earnings for the first quarter 1987 of 624
mln dlrs, or 1.37 dls per shr, up 16 pct from 537 mln dlrs, or
1.18 dlrs per share for the same quarter a year ago.
general electric chairman john welch jr reiterated the
company's outlook for 1987 in which it expects double-digit ge
earnings growth for the year. he said the first quarter results
are in line with those expectations.
general electric cited the strong results in tv network and
station operations of the national broadcasting co, which was
not part of ge in the first quarter of 1986, as one reason for
it also noted that aircraft engine operating profit was
much higher than a year ago, caused by a increase in shipments
than the 1986 quarter, which was impacted by a strike.
aerospace revenues were sharply higher in this year's first
quarter from a year ago, mainly because of the inclusion of
rca's aerospace and defense business, the company said.
in addition, consumer products revenues were up from last
year, mainly because of including sales of rca video products.
general electric said restructuring provisions of 308 mln
dlrs before taxes to implement various strategic moves were
charged against operations in the first quarter of 1987. it
added that there was a one-time gain of 281 mlns dlrs after
taxes from an inventory accounting change.
and technical products revenues and operating profit were
ahead of last year, led by a strong increases in medical
systems volume and the inclusion this year of rca's
teck still in talks on b.c. copper venture
was continuing talks about joining a joint copper venture at
highland valley, british columbia, held by affiliates cominco
ltd &lt;clt> and &lt;lornex mining corp>, but did not know when
teck vice-president of administration john guminski said in
reply to a query that the talks had been "ongoing for a long
time." he declined to speculate on the outcome.
cominco, 29.5 pct owned by a consortium led by teck, is
optimistic that the talks will soon be concluded, spokesman don
"i think all partners are hopeful that the situation will be
"we're optimistic that they will be concluded shortly," he
added. townson declined to specify when the talks might end.
cominco and teck's 22 pct-owned lornex agreed in january
1986 to form the joint venture, merging their highland valley
cominco and lornex share equally in control and management
of the highland valley operations, while cominco has a 55 pct
share of production and lornex receives 45 pct.
for the six months following july 1, 1986, when the venture
officially started production, highland valley had total ore
milled of 22.6 mln short tons, grading an average of 0.41 pct
cominco's share of production was 43,000 short tons of
copper contained in concentrate, 1,200 short tons of molybdenum
in concentrate, 340,000 ounces of silver and 800 ounces of
a consortium, 50 pct owned by teck and 25 pct each by mim
(canada) inc and metallgesellschaft canada ltd, acquired its
cominco stake last year from canadian pacific ltd &lt;cp>.
banponce corp &lt;bdep> 1st qtr net
shr 1.08 dlrs vs 1.00 dlr
xebec &lt;xebc> to report 2nd qtr loss
xebec corp said it expects to
report a loss for its second quarter ended april three, due
principally to a decline in sales to international business
machines corp &lt;ibm>, the company's largest customer.
xebec also said it expects revenues to total about 23 mln
the company reported a second quarter loss last year of 1.9
mln dlrs, or 14 cts per share, on 23.9 mln in revenues.
xebec said ibm has historically accounted for about 50 pct
of the company's revenues, but that total fell to 20 pct during
ibm had used xebec's hard disk drive controller products in
the ibm pc/xt, a product which ibm is phasing out.
xebec said it intends to continue streamlining its
operations in light of the loss of business.
the company also said it has already consolidated two of
its plants in nevada and it now plans to sell unused and
surplus assets to provide additional liquidity.
ccc accepts export bid for wheat flour to iraq
accepted a bid for an export bonus to cover a sale of 12,500
tonnes of wheat flour to iraq, the u.s. agriculture department
the bonus awarded was 113.0 dlrs per tonne and will be paid
to peavey company in the form of commodities from ccc stocks.
the wheat flour is for delivery may 15-june 15, 1987, the
an additional 162,500 tonnes of wheat flour are still
available to iraq under the export enhancement program
initiative announced january 7, 1987, usda said.
egypt authorized to buy pl-480 wheat - usda
egypt has been authorized to purchase
about 200,000 tonnes of u.s. wheat under an existing pl-480
agreement, the u.s. agriculture department said.
it may buy the wheat, valued at 22.0 mln dlrs, between
april 15 and august 31, 1987, and ship it from u.s. ports by
caterpillar &lt;cat> reaffirms first quarter outlook
delivered at its annual meeting in san francisco, reiterated
its expectation of a loss in the first quarter.
it said results would be hurt by a 25 mln dlr one-time
charge by caterpillar mitsubishi, a 50-pct owned affiliate. the
company said it expected profit from operations for the full
in remarks prepared for delivery to shareholders, president
peter donis said caterpillar's targeted five pct cost reduction
in 1987 "will be difficult to achieve because the weaker dollar
has limited opportunities to obtain lower material costs."
broker boosts zondervan &lt;zond> stake to 7.1 pct
minneapolis, minn., broker jeffrey wendel said it raised its
stake in zondervan corp to 292,900 shares, or 7.1 pct of the
total outstanding, from 238,900 shares, or 5.8 pct.
in a filing with the securities and exchange commission,
the wendel group said it bought 54,000 zondervan common shares
between march 24 and april 3 at prices ranging from 27.87 to
the wendel group has acted in cooperation with another
shareholder group headed by london investor christopher moran,
who sought unsuccessfully last year to take over zondervan.
&lt;kiena gold mines ltd> said shareholders
approved a previously reported proposed two-for-one common
record date of the split will be april 21, kiena said.
board declared a quarterly dividend of nine cts per share
payable may 15 to holders of record april 17.
the dividend comes after a two-for-one stock split,
effective april 10, which was approved by shareholders today.
the company paid a dividend of 14 cts per share on a
day int'l &lt;day> to sell unit
day international corp said it has
entered into a letter of intent to sell its allen industries
inc unit to a group including the unit's current management.
day said the sale could enable day to accelerate its
earnings for its current fiscal year ending october 31, 1987.
"net earnings for the full year (ending october 31)
should be in the ball park of some analysts' estimates of 16
mln dlrs to 19 mln dlrs," richard jacob, day chairman and chief
day reported earnings of 3.1 mln dlrs, or 39 cts a share,
day said the agreement is subject to the preparation and
negotiation of a definitive agreement and the ability of the
rite aid corp &lt;rad> sets quarterly dividend
qtly div 16.5 cts vs 16.5 cts
south korea corn imports may increase - usda
south korea's purchase of about 2.4
mln tonnes of u.s. corn in the past six months -- close to
double last year's total -- indicates that imports from the
united states, as well as total imports are set for a dramatic
jump, the u.s. agriculture department said.
in its world production and trade report, the department
said total south korea corn imports for the 1986/87 season
(oct-sept) are estimated at 4.3 mln tonnes, with about 3.4 mln
during the 1985/86 season, imports totaled only 1.3 mln
tonnes of u.s. corn out of a total of 3.6 mln tonnes.
ite appears the koreans are shifting back to u.s. corn in
light of competitive u.s. prices and uncertain supplies from
china, argentina and south africa, it said.
mexican cattle imports to be branded - usda
all steers imported into the united
states from mexico must now be branded with the letter m on the
right jaw, the u.s. agriculture department said.
in its world production and trade report, the department
said the branding is necessary to improve surveillance for
bovine tuberculosis because it provides a permanent way to
the requirement is not expected to affect the number of
mexican steers imported into the united states and the brand
will be applied before the animals arrive at u.s. ports of
last november, the mexican government authorized an export
quota of nearly 1.1 mln head of live cattle for the 1986/87
season (aug-july), most of which goes to the united states.
vulcan &lt;vul> sees first quarter operating loss
results will show a loss, chairman lloyd i. miller told told
the company reported a profit of 365,883 dlrs, 23 cts a
share, for the first quarter last year with one cent a share
coming from non-operating factors, a spokesman said.
miller attributed the expected loss to completion of the
purchase transfer and consolidation of operating assets of the
o'sullivan rubber division, saying this was proving more costly
and taking more time than originally anticipated.
vulcan is working to resolve the problems, miller told
shareholders, adding it appears it will take most of 1987 to
ual &lt;ual> has no comment on stock rise
ual inc, citing company policy, told
the new york stock exchange it would not comment on the unusual
ual, parent of united airlines, closed up 6-1/4 at 72 on
wall street traders said ual's stock soared in response to
the the proposed 4.6 billion dlr buyout offer by united air's
pilots union and on a general rise in air fares throughout the
strata corp &lt;stata> year dec 31 loss
shr loss 1.11 dlrs vs loss 1.53 dlrs
net loss 7.1 mln vs loss 8.8 mln
revs 3.1 mln vs eight mln
strata &lt;stata> 1986 earnings report qualified
earnings report contained a qualified opinion from its
strata said it owed 1.4 mln dlrs in overdue interest to its
lender at the end of 1986, and the entire 10.9 mln dlr
principle has been classified as a liability.
the company, which has an agreement to merge with &lt;lomak
petroleum inc>, lost 7.1 mln dlrs in 1986 against a loss of 8.8
dayton hudson corp &lt;dh> votes quarterly payout
qtly div 23 cts vs 23 cts prior qtr
qtly div 20 cts vs 20 cts in prior qtr
nat'l distillers says it agrees to sell spirits unit for 545 mln dlrs to american brands
nat'l distillers says it agrees to sell spirits unit for 545 mln dlrs to american brands
usda seeks comments on grain discount schedule
seeking public comments on the question of adjusting the
commodity credit corporation's (ccc) discount and premium
schedules to improve the quality of grain it accepts as loan
collateral or under price support programs.
the premiums and discounts schedule are based on quality
factors such as moisture content and kernel damage. the
schedule stipulates the premiums and discounts used for valuing
grain the ccc accepts or purchases during the year.
the department said it is possible that producers could be
encouraged to delivery higher quality grain to ccc by adjusting
comments are due by april 24 and a report to congress is
required by law by may 10.
cascade importers unit acquires paris company
cascade international europa gmbh of west germany, said it
tentatively acquired worldwide rights for the products of madam
gre from the bernard tapie group in paris.
the agreement calls for cascade to have the rights for the
manufacturing and trading of perfumes, skin care and treatment
products, and cosmetics of the group, it said.
cascade said the agreement also includes the exclusive
rights to trade through duty-free channels worldwide the
in addition, cascade said it was granted an option to
purchase all the assets including the plant and equipment
the company said the cosmetic product line in the u.s.
market alone could represent 20 mln dlrs in revenue.
armel inc &lt;aml> 4th qtr loss
oper shr loss 79 cts vs loss 2.32 dlrs
oper net loss 2,536,896 vs loss 6,562,472
revs 13.8 mln vs 14.5 mln
oper shr loss 59 cts vs loss 2.35 dlrs
oper net loss 1,712,896 vs loss 5,747,472
revs 43.6 mln vs 44.2 mln
note: 1986 excludes charge of 12 cts per share in the
fourth quarter and gain of 11 cts per share in the year.
national distillers &lt;dr> to sell spirits unit
said it signed a definitive agreement to sell its spirits
division for 545 mln dlrs to james beam distilling co, a unit
the sale of the spirits division was made under the
company's previously announced plan to sell its spirits and
wines businesses, it said. the wine business was sold last
month for 128 mln dlrs to heublein inc, part of grand
the purchase price will be paid in cash, a national
the sale permits national to focus on its core businesses,
proceeds from the sale will be used to repay debt and for
other corporate purposes, the company said.
in a separate statement, american brands said the sale
would be for 545 mln dlrs plus the assumption of liabilities.
the sale would be subject to compliance with the
hart-scott-rodino antitrust improvements act and other
national's distilled spirits business has sales of about
580 mln dlrs, american brands said. national's spirits brands
include gilbey's gin and vodka, dekuyper liqueurs and windsor
management science &lt;msai> loss may top 20 cts
clarifying statements made earlier today, said its loss for the
first quarter could exceed 20 cts a share because of
non-recurring expenses associated with the acquisition of
earlier today, the company told a meeting of investors here
that the first quarter loss would be 20 cts a share.
wojnilower sees drop in u.s. interest rates
the federal reserve will promote lower
interest rates this year to sustain world economic growth,
first boston corp managing director albert wojnilower said.
as much as the fed would like to take a tough line against
inflation, it cannot act to slow the growth of credit without
"on selected occasions when the dollar seems steady, and,
because the trade deficit is not responding, the united states
decided to push germany and japan harder to meet their
commitments to economic growth, the federal reserve will do its
part by moving rates down," wojnilower said in a report.
"justifiably not anticipating either a recession or
seriously higher interest rates, securities market participants
have seen little to fear," wojnilower said.
he said last week's "hiccup" in money and currency rates
and bond and stock prices was probably caused by japanese
window dressing for march 31 end-of-fiscal-year accounts.
wojnilower said the u.s. probably enjoyed above-average
economic growth in the first quarter. however, the pick-up
seems to reflect an unsustainable pace of inventory building
and the prospect for the full year is still for real gross
national product growth of about 2-1/2 pct, he said.
raytech &lt;ray> buys west german company
&lt;raybestos industrie-produkte gmbh> for 7.5 mln dlrs.
raybestos, with manufacturing facilities in radevormwald,
west germany, produces friction materials for use in clutch and
intercare &lt;care> to post 4th qtr loss
expects to report a substantial loss for its fourth quarter
ended january 31 because of a writeoff of expenses associated
with its recently terminated debt and equity offering.
the company also said the write off includes expenses
associated with the acquisition of u.s. medical enterprises
inc, and with the restructuring of certain partnerships.
intercare also said it increased its reserve against
executives at the company were not immediately available to
intercare also said it has implemented a workforce
reduction, closed two medical centers and is considering
additional closings as a means of reducing a working capital
canada to monitor steel imports, exports
canada plans to monitor steel shipments
flowing in and out of the country in an attempt to appease
concerns in the u.s. over the high level of canadian steel
exports, trade minister pat carney said.
"to help maintain our open access to the u.s. steel market,
the government is taking further action to ensure we have more
accurate data on exports and imports and that canada is not
used as a backdoor to the u.s. market by offshore suppliers,"
carney also said canadian companies were being asked to
exercise prudence in the u.s. market and both countries were
considering establishing a joint commission to study the
carney told the house of commons she will soon announce an
amendment to the exports and imports permits act to set up the
canadian steel shipments to the u.s. have risen to 5.7 pct
cent of the u.s. market in recent months, almost double the
level just two years ago, canadian trade officials said.
the increase in canadian shipments comes at a time of
growing anger in the u.s. over rising steel imports from
several countries in the face of a decline in the domestic
some u.s. lawmakers have proposed canada's share of the
american market be limited to 2.4 pct.
united tech &lt;utx> sees no earnings impact
the decision by an international consortium not to develop a
new engine would have no impact on 1987 or 1988 earnings.
&lt;international aero engines>, iae, 30 pct owned by united
technologies' pratt and whitney division, has decided not to
launch a superfan version of its v2500 engine.
"we've told analysts that iae's decision not to launch a
full development program of the iae superfan for certification
in 1991 will have no short term impact on earnings," a united
short term refers to 1987 and 1988, the spokesman said. he
iae's other owners are rolls royce plc, &lt;japanese aero
engines corp>, fiat spa and &lt;mtu> of west germany.
analysts are estimating united technologies will earn 3.75
dlrs to 4.50 dlrs a share in 1987. it reported earnings of 36
cts a share in 1986, which included two large writeoffs.
stewart and stevenson &lt;ssss> 4th qtr net
shr profit 72 cts vs profit 14 cts
net profit 3,309,000 vs profit 609,000
revs 72 mln vs 65 mln
shr nil vs loss 4.13 dlrs
net profit 1,000 vs loss 19 mln
revs 249 mln vs 269 mln
note: full name stewart and stevenson services inc.
westamerica bancorp &lt;wab> 1st qtr net
shr 98 cts vs 63 cts
loans 834.8 mln vs 729.0 mln
deposits 1.04 billion vs 942.1 mln
assets 1.15 billion vs 1.02 billion
u.s.senate lifts some bans on natural gas
legislation to lift a ban on new construction of natural
gas-fired power plants and other large industrial gas-burning
the bill, sponsored by senate energy committee chairman
bennett johnston, also repeals mandatory incremental pricing of
natural gas which was designed to protect residential consumers
from major price increases by forcing some industrial users to
"this legislation will open up new natural gas markets," the
the gas restrictions were enacted in 1978 in response to a
shortage of natural gas and predictions of higher prices.
"now both oil and gas prices are severely depressed,"
in a compromise with coal producers, the bill requires new
baseload electric powerplants be designed to accomodate
modifications necessary to burning coal or another alternate
southeast bancorp &lt;stb> acts on brazilian debt
following the lead of other major
banks, southeast banking corp told the securities and exchange
commission it would place 54.2 mln dlrs of medium- and
long-term brazilian debt on non-accrual or cash status.
based on current interest rates, it estimated in a filing
that the move will reduce net income by about 800,000 dlrs in
the first quarter and 3.2 mln dlrs for all of 1987. the company
also said it did not believe the brazilian debt situation would
have a "material adverse" effect on it.
it also said it would issue 1,080,000 common shares in
connection with its acquisition of popular bancshares corp.
williams &lt;wmb> sees flat pipeline volumes in 1987
williams cos said it expected oil and
fertilizer transportation volumes to be flat in 1987 but said
operating profits from the pipeline unit should improve from
49.4 mln dlrs earned last year when a seven mln dlr special
williams pipeline co took the charge against earnings in
1986 for the removal of more than 500 miles of old pipeline
from service and for casualty losses. companywide, williams had
a net loss of 134 mln dlrs on total revenues of 1.85 billion
dlrs, a decline from profits of 32 mln dlrs on sales of 2.46
in its annual report, williams said its northwest pipeline
corp and williams natural gas co had natural gas costs that are
among the lowest in the nation, averaging 2.04 dlrs and 2.07
dlrs per mcf, respectively, last year. total natural gas
reserves for both units declined to 10,010 billion cubic feet
in 1986 from 11,334 billion cubic feet the previous year.
the company said its williams natural gas unit, which has
less take-or-pay exposure than most major pipelines, should
show improvement in its 1987 operating results because of
changes tariff and federal tax rates.
the company's gas marketing business is expected to have
somewhat lower earnings in 1987 because of competition in its
operating region, the annual report said. the gas marketing
unit earned 26.0 mln dlrs on sales of 285.6 mln dlrs last year.
williams also said it expected a substantial decline in its
debt to equity ratio this year because of more than 250 mln
dlrs received in cash from the sale of agrico chemical co and
proceeds from the sale and leaseback of williams
telecommunications co. the telecommunications business, a
2,000-mile fiber optic system for long distance use, will not
be profitable until late 1988, williams said.
super valu stores inc &lt;svu> 4th qtr feb 28 net
shr 38 cts vs 25 cts
sales 2.27 billion vs 1.97 billion
shr 1.20 dlrs vs 1.23 dlrs
sales 9.07 billion vs 7.91 billion
note: 1986 period ended february 22, 1986
1986 earnings include net loss of unconsolidated subsidiary
of 162,000 dlrs in the quarter and 702,000 dlrs for the year
parker drilling co &lt;pkd> 2nd qtr feb 28 loss
shr loss 70 cts vs loss 57 cts
net loss 20,616,000 vs loss 16,854,000
revs 23.1 mln vs 60.1 mln
shr loss 1.38 dlrs vs loss 1.02 dlrs
net loss 40,780,000 vs loss 29,996,000
revs 61.0 mln vs 114.9 mln
coffee could drop to 70/80 cts, cardenas says
international coffee prices could drop to
between 70 and 80 cents a lb by next october if no agreement is
reached to support the market, jorge cardenas, manager of
colombia's national coffee growers' federation said.
speaking at a forum for industrialists, he said one of the
reasons was that the market was already saturated and that
producers will have excess production and stockpiles of 39 mln
today, may futures in new york settled at 107.90 cents a
hbo &lt;hboc> urges shareholders against andover
hbo and co said it sent a letter of
strongly urging shareholders not to sign any proxy cards sent
on march 30, andover group, a two-man general partnership
which owns about seven pct of hbo's stock, filed preliminary
proxy materials with the securities and exchange commission
seeking to nominate an alternative slate of directors at the
andover had expressed an interest to acquire the company in
september 1986 but hbo has never received an offer from them,
in addition, hbo said its financial condition is improving
rapidly as the result of a significant restructuring
it expects the company to report net income of about 40 cts
per share in 1987 and a very significant increase in 1988.
for the year ended december 1986, the company reported a
loss of 3.6 mln dlrs, or 16 cts per share.
(cfcf inc) six mths feb 28 net
shr 51 cts vs 56 cts
revs 45.9 mln vs 45.3 mln
&lt;uap inc> said it has acquired slater
auto electric ltd, with two ontario stores, and united diesel
engine parts ltd, of dartmouth, nova scotia, for undisclosed
terms. it said the transactions, together with acquisitions
earlier this year, will increase its annual sales by about 4.5
eia says distillate stocks unchanged, gasoline off 200,000, crude up 6.3 mln
eia says distillate stocks unchanged, gasoline off 200,000, crude up 6.3 mln
usda discussing pl 480 agreement with morocco
currently discussing an amendment to a pl 480 agreement signed
with morocco on january 22, but the mix of commodities under
the amendment has not been determined, a u.s. agriculture
the official noted the agreement signed in january provided
for the supply of about 55,000 tonnes of vegetable oil, 55,000
tonnes of corn and 126,000 tonnes of wheat, all for delivery
during the current fiscal year, ending this september 30.
no purchase authorizations for the commodities provided in
the january agreement have been announced by the department.
eia says distillate stocks unchanged in week
primary storage were unchanged in the week ended april three at
106.9 mln barrels, the energy information administration (eia)
in its weekly petroleum status report, the department of
energy agency said gasoline stocks were off 200,000 barrels in
the week to 248.1 mln barrels and refinery crude oil stocks
rose 6.3 mln barrels to 335.8 mln.
the eia said residual fuel stocks fell 100,000 barrels to
38.1 mln barrels and crude oil stocks in the strategic
petroleum reserve (spr) rose 1.1 mln barrels to 520.0 mln.
the total of all crude, refined product and spr stocks rose
9.4 mln barrels to 1,561.1, it said.
hawkeye &lt;hwkb> 1986 annual report qualified
financial results were qualified by its auditors, according to
"...there are conditions which may indicate that the
company will be unable to continue as a going concern,"
auditors deloitte haskins and sells said in hawkeye's annual
hawkeye reported a 1986 loss of almost 59 mln dlrs, citing
an increase in its loan loss provision to 34.7 mln dlrs and
restructuring costs of 27 mln dlrs.
however, hawkeye, with assets of 1.09 billion dlrs at 1986
year end, said it expects "to have sufficient cash to meet its
obligations for the next 12-month period."
last july the bank holding company reached a debt
restructuring agreement which identifed 17 bank subsidiaries
and five non-bank operations for disposition.
"the restructuring has improved hawkeye's financial
condition, but it does not assure that hawkeye will be able to
survive as a going concern," the report said.
hawkeye's survival will depend on its ability to comply
with provisions of the debt restructuring and regulatory
agreements and on its ability to return to profitable
there can be no assurance that hawkeye will be able to meet
these requirements. however, the company "believes it will be
able to do so," hawkeye said.
shr 33 cts vs 37 cts
assets 1.7 billion vs 1.5 billion
deposits 1.4 billion vs 1.2 billion
loans 1.1 billion vs 900 mln
note: year-ago results restated to reflect merger with
dome &lt;dmp> plan may force sale of encor stake
restructure debt of more than 6.10 billion canadian dlrs
includes provisions that may force the company to sell its 42
pct stake in &lt;encor energy corp inc>, dome said in a u.s.
dome said in the filing that its debt plan proposes making
payments under a five year income debenture to the lender whose
debt is secured by dome's encor shares.
after the five years are up, "under certain circumstances
the shares of encor may be required to be disposed," the company
dome has pledged its 42.5 mln encor shares as security for
part of its debt to &lt;canadian imperial bank of commerce>,
estimated last year at 947 mln dlrs.
analysts have said commerce bank was pressing dome to sell
the stock to pay down its debt.
dome's encor shares had a market value of 313 mln dlrs on
march 17, 1987, the company's filing said.
as previously reported, dome is seeking approval in
principle for the debt restructuring plan. dome said in the
filing it proposed lenders sign a letter of understanding in
early april, with implementation to be effective july 1, 1987.
dome petroleum reiterated in the sec filing that its
existence as a going concern is dependent on continuing the
interim debt plan, due to expire on june 30, and winning
agreement for its proposed restructuring plan.
"the company believes that the negotiation and
implementation of the proposed debt restructuring plan is
"however, the final outcome of the negotiations cannot be
predicted at this time," it said.
recent u.s. oil demand off 2.6 pct from year ago
u.s. oil demand as measured by
products supplied fell 2.6 pct in the four weeks ended april
three to 15.73 mln barrels per day (bpd) from 16.16 mln in the
same period a year ago, the energy information administration
in its weekly petroleum status report, the energy
department agency said distillate demand was off 7.9 pct in the
period to 2.90 mln bpd from 3.15 mln a year earlier.
gasoline demand averaged 6.76 mln bpd, off 3.1 pct from
6.98 mln last year, while residual fuel demand was 1.15 mln
bpd, off 16.9 pct from 1.39 mln, the eia said.
so far this year, distillate demand fell 2.3 pct to 3.20
mln bpd from 3.28 mln in 1986, gasoline demand was 6.63 mln
bpd, off 0.3 pct from 6.65 mln, and residual fuel demand fell
4.9 pct to 1.35 mln bpd from 1.42 mln, the eia said.
year-to-date domestic crude output was estimated at 8.40
mln bpd, off 7.6 pct from 9.09 mln a year ago, while gross
crude imports averaged 3.92 mln bpd, up 27.1 pct from 3.08 mln,
deficit cuts seen unable to cure trade deficit
pleased with congressional moves to trim next year's federal
budget deficit but believe the actions will do little to help
improve the u.s. trade deficit or buoy the economy.
the house of representatives is expected to vote tomorrow
to approve a trillion-dollar budget blueprint for the coming
fiscal year that reduces the deficit by 38 billion dlrs.
similarly, the senate budget committee has approved a plan
that would cut federal red ink by about 37 billion dlrs next
"in terms of the economy, 37-38 billion dlrs is
infinitesimal, so cuts of this magnitude will have little
impact on the economy and the trade deficit," said stanley
collander, a touche ross federal budget policy analyst.
"at best, it will have a small positive effect," collander
federal reserve board chairman paul volcker has repeatedly
told congress that cutting federal red ink would go a long way
to help reduce the massive trade deficit and also help ease
some of the downward pressure on the value of the dollar.
the u.s. government has attempted to remedy the trade
imbalance by driving down the value of the dollar. but volcker
has warned that a further fall in the dollar's value is fraught
such a decline, he has said, could refuel inflation as
imported goods become more expensive and chase away foreign
capital needed to finance the federal budget deficit.
in addition, in february, u.s. officials meeting with other
major industrialized nations in paris agreed that the value of
the dollar had dropped enough and that world exchange rates
should be stabilized at around current levels.
as part of that agreement, japan and west germany agreed to
take steps to stimulate their economies and the united states
agreed to cut its budget deficit.
the alternative to driving down the dollar any further as a
way to deal with the trade deficit, volcker said recently, is
to reduce u.s. consumption, particularly federal spending.
"if you don't deal with the budget deficit, everything else
you do is going to be counterproductive," volcker said in recent
testimony before the senate banking committee.
volcker also said he would prefer to further tighten the
government's purse strings than have the fed tighten the credit
supply if action was needed to fight inflationary pressures or
to assure the continued flow of foreign capital into the united
analysts say that fed tightening now could choke off the
current modest economic expansion and threaten a recession.
kemper financial services economist john silvia stressed
that any deficit reduction was better than none.
but he said the size of the cuts under consideration were
not enough to give the federal reserve board the flexibility it
needs to steer the economy or to keep the value of the dollar
from plunging further in world exchange markets.
"there's no doubt that some deficit reduction helps, but if
your objective is to stabilize the dollar and perserve the
fed's flexibility to conduct monetary policy, then the answer
is, it's not enough," silvia told reuters.
the u.s. trade deficit has become one of the government's
the 1986 deficit was 169.8 billion dlrs and there is as yet
little indication that this year's figure will be any lower,
though administration officials have predicted it will drop by
about 20 to 30 billion dlrs by year's end.
in the past, volcker has joked that he never lost sleep
worrying whether congress would cut too much fat from the
on the other hand, he also has made it clear he is not
attached to the gradually declining deficit ceilings set for
the 1986-1991 period by last year's gramm-rudman balanced
while the new law set a ceiling of 108 billion dlrs for
next year's federal deficit, both the house and senate budget
committees have conceded that their budget plans would fall
short of the deficit reduction goal by about 25 billion dlrs.
"for political reasons, 35 to 40 billion dlrs is about the
most you're going to get" out of congress at the present time,
said touche ross's collander. "to do something more than that
would be extraordinary, remarkable and very, very difficult."
collander said the real danger for congress was to end up
short of the deficit reduction goal set by its budget panels.
"to an extent, this has become the minimum acceptable
reduction level," he explained. "anything less than that will now
look like a failure to wall street."
the budget plan now under debate on the house floor would
lower an estimated 171 billion dlr deficit for the year
beginning on october one to about 133 billion dlrs by cutting
defense and domestic programs by 38 billion dlrs from their
anticipated spending levels for next year.
the senate budget committee has called for a deficit of
nearly 134 billion dlrs with about 18.5 billion dlrs in new
taxes and about the same amount in spending cuts.
stewart and stevenson services &lt;ssss> 4th qtr
shr profit 72 cts vs profit 14 cts
revs 72 mln vs 65 mln
shr profit nil vs loss 4.13 dlrs
net profit 1,000 vs loss 19 mln
revs 245 mln vs 269.1 mln
westamerica bancorporation &lt;wsam> 1st qtr net
shr 98 cts vs 63 cts
assets 1.15 billion vs 1.02 billion
deposits 1.04 billion vs 942.1 mln
loans 834.8 mln vs 729.0 mln
return on avg assets 0.92 pct vs 0.63 pct
remain open and there are no plans to close them since a new
marketing policy means an unlimited amount can be registered,
gilberto arango, president of the private exporters'
"the philosophy of the new policy is not to close
registrations. nobody so far said may would be closed," he told
on march 13, colombia opened registrations for april and
without giving breakdowns, arango said private exporters
had registered 1,322,804 bags this calendar year up to april 6,
or roughly 440,000 bags per month, slightly lower than the
he estimated the amount of bags registered by the national
coffee growers' federation at about the same, meaning a total
of about 900,000 bags registered and sold per month by
"the only change that could happen is, because of the
volume, we would be told that from such a date, registrations
would be for june shipment, etc" arango said.
gateway bancorp inc &lt;gban> 1st qtr net
shr 32 cts vs 34 cts
deposits 174.7 mln vs 134.4 mln
note: per share amounts adjusted to reflect 10-for-one
stock split effective sept 16, 1986.
more american brands &lt;amb> acquisitions seen
american brands inc's 545 mln dlrs
acquisition of national distillers and chemical corp's liquor
business is expected to be one of a series of acquisitions by
"they were very frustrated with their inability to get
chesebrough. they said they were looking for an acquisition. it
doesn't surprise me that they came up with another one," said
allan kaplan of merrill lynch and co.
american brands failed late last year in its 2.9 billion
dlrs bid for chesebrough-ponds inc when unilever n.v. agreed to
buy the company. but since then, wall street has been
speculating that american brands would find another candidate
to help reduce its earnings exposure to tobacco.
"this is just typical," said george thompson of
prudential-bache securities. "there's going to be more to come
here. american brands had to make an acquisition because
tobacco is still a significant part of earnings. their position
is a little less favorable than philip morris and rj reynolds,"
cash flow from its low growth tobacco, but the tobacco business
does require great amounts of capital expenditures. it can
therefore use its funds to make acquisitions. analysts said the
national distillers' spirits company, which makes gilbey's gin
and vodka, old grandad and old crow whiskey, is not quite the
"the distilled spirits business has been in a steady
gradual decline for sometime, as has the tobacco business,"
bundesbank calls for central bank cooperation
called on central banks of major industrialised nations to
cooperate closely on exchange and interest rate policies.
in a lecture at the university of surrey, pre-released
here, koehler said that the only alternative to cooperation was
protectionism and control on capital movements.
"central banks have sufficient experience of exchange market
transactions to steer exchange rates where they want to have
them," he said. he added that west german growth forecasts would
have to be revised downward because of the recent dollar drop
to 1.80 marks from above two marks at the start of 1987.
koehler said that transactions on foreign exchange markets
had parted company with transactions in goods, services and
investments. it was the scale of speculative transactions that
speculative inflows could cause monetary aggregates to
grow. to reverse such a rise in the money stock, interest rates
would have to be lowered to allow funds to drain off.
"in other words, the monetary policy measures required are
different from -- and sometimes diametrically opposed to --
those needed when the money stock is increasing as a result of
the dollar fall was one means of reducing the massive u.s.
current account deficit. but attempts to keep the depreciation
going by talking the dollar down posed problems.
the sharp drop of the dollar had led to an immediate steep
rise in the cost of u.s. imports and a sharp fall in the cost
of european imports. but the volume effect of falling imports
to the u.s. and rising imports to europe would take time to
make itself felt compared with the price effect.
"hence the depreciation of the dollar may well be going
further than would be necessary to adjust the current account
over the medium term," koehler said.
a reduction in the u.s. current account deficit would occur
only if the growth rate of gnp was higher than domestic demand.
in japan and west germany by contrast, domestic demand should
"in germany this did indeed happen in 1986," koehler said.
if a further appreciation of the dollar was to be
prevented, the u.s. current account deficit could be offset by
an inflow of foreign funds into the u.s..
but only if there was an appropriate interest rate
differential would europe and japan look for financial
when selecting monetary policy instruments, a central bank
had to pay greater heed than in the past to the impact its
measures might have on expectations and consequent decisions.
koehler said the bundesbank was changing money market rates
by operating on the open market rather than adjusting leading
interest rates because of the signal this gives to the market
and its substantial impact on exchange rates.
it was not only important to achieve the domestic goals of
price stability, economic growth and full employment but also
to tackle international problems like the exchange rate
problem, the debt problem and the current account problem.
a strategy had to be designed that helped "the safeguarding
of non-inflationary economic growth in an international
monetary system largely free of disruptions," koehler said.
given the system of floating exchange rates, it was
necessary for central banks to agree to intervene. it sufficed
to tell the market where central banks saw exchange rates over
the next few years and intervention points should not be set,
because they were only testing points for the market, he said.
in order to keep the international monetary system free of
disruptions central banks should not only intervene jointly but
also cooperate on interest rate policies, koehler said.
unemployment rate rose to 8.4 pct of the estimated workforce in
march from 8.2 pct in february and 7.9 pct a year earlier, the
the number of jobless rose to 650,700 from 631,900 in
february and 593,200 a year earlier, the bureau said.
unadjusted, the number of unemployed rose to 702,600 from
699,600 in february but the rate eased to 9.0 pct from 9.1,
reflecting a slight increase in the estimated workforce. in
march 1986, 640,400 persons, or 8.5 pct of the workforce, were
csr says it is retaining non-delhi gas-oil stakes
csr ltd &lt;csra.s> said its sale of &lt;delhi
petroleum pty ltd> will not affect the other oil and gas
csr sold delhi, which holds an average 25 pct in the santos
ltd &lt;stos.s>-led cooper-eromanga basin onshore gas and liquids
joint ventures, to an exxon corp &lt;xon> unit for 985 mln dlrs on
in a statement to clarify the position, csr said it will
retain its roma gas unit, the associated roma-brisbane gas
pipeline and the bula oilfield on seram, indonesia, plus
exploration interests in queensland and hainan island, china.
japan ministry has no comment on rice talks report
on a local newspaper report that japan had agreed to hold talks
on its closed rice market in the new gatt round.
"we have no idea about the report and cannot comment," a
nihon keizai shinbun, quoting unnamed government sources,
said japan would tell u.s. agriculture secretary richard lyng
and u.s. trade representative clayton yeutter of its
intentions. the two are due to visit japan later this month for
the u.s. has been pressing japan to discuss the rice issue
at the new round of general agreement on tariffs and trade
talks. but japan has said gatt is not the right forum.
imports of rice to japan are banned under the foodstuff
nihon keizai said japan's plan resulted from worries about
mounting trade tension with the u.s. at the gatt talks, japan
will try to persuade the u.s. that its rice policy is
the 93-nation world trade body began the uruguay trade
round last september. it will take four years to negotiate.
showa denko exports aluminium casting equipment
&lt;showa denko ltd> said it is exporting
aluminium billet casting equipment and technology to countries
that have recently begun aluminium smelting.
a company official said it won a 500 mln yen order to
deliver 10 sets of casting equipment to venezuela's venalum by
end-1987. he said it received an order for one set from
aluminium bahrain b.s.c. last year and expects further orders
showa denko withdrew from smelting last year but expects to
increase its sales of equipment and technology, he said.
economic spotlight - telecom is key japan ministry
japan's little-known ministry of posts and
telecommunications (mpt) has emerged as an international force
to be reckoned with, political analysts said.
mpt, thrust into the spotlight by trade rows with the u.s.
and britain, is in a position of strength due to its control of
a lucrative industry and its ties with important politicians,
"the ministry is standing athwart the regulatory control of
a key industrial sector, telecommunications and information,"
"they are a potent political force," the diplomatic source
but mpt is finding domestic political prowess does not
always help when it comes to trade friction diplomacy, analysts
"the ministry was a minor ministry and its people were not
so internationalized," said waseda university professor mitsuru
uchida. "suddenly they're standing at the centre of the world
community and in that sense, they're at a loss (as to) how to
most recently the ministry has been embroiled in a row with
london over efforts by britain's cable and wireless plc to keep
a major stake in one of two consortia trying to compete in
the ministry has favoured the merger of the two rival
groups, arguing the market cannot support more than one
competitor to kokusai denshin denwa co ltd, which now
it has also opposed a major management role in the planned
merger for any non-japanese overseas telecommunications firm on
the grounds that no such international precedent exists.
the ministry's stance has outraged both london, which has
threatened to retaliate, and washington, which says the merger
plan is evidence of japan's failure to honour pledges to open
washington is also angry over other ministry moves which it
says have limited access for u.s. firms to japan's car
much of mpt's new prominence stems from the growth of the
"what has been happening is an important shift in the
economy which makes the ministry a very important place," said
james abegglen, head of the consulting firm asia advisory
a decision to open the telecommunications industry to
competition under a new set of laws passed in 1985 has boosted
rather than lessened mpt's authority, analysts said.
"with the legal framework eased, they became the de facto
legal framework," said bache securities (japan) analyst darrell
close links with the powerful political faction of the
ruling liberal democratic party (ldp) nurtured by former prime
minister kakuei tanaka are another key to mpt's influence, the
"other factions ignored mpt (in the 1970s), but the tanaka
faction was forward looking and ... recognized the importance
of mpt," uchida said. many former bureaucrats became members of
the influential political group, he added.
the ministry also has power in the financial sector due to
the more than 100,000 billion yen worth of deposits in the
mpt has helped block finance ministry plans to deregulate
interest rates on small deposits, a key element in financial
liberalisation, since the change would remove the postal
savings system's ability to offer slightly higher rates than
diplomatic sources, frustrated with what they see as mpt's
obstructionist and protectionist posture, have characterized
critics charge mpt with protecting its own turf, limiting
competition and sheltering the former monopolies under its
wing. providing consumers with the best service at the lowest
price takes a back seat to such considerations, they said.
but many of the ministry's actions are not unlike those of
its bureaucratic counterparts in much of the western world
"the united states is really the odd man out," abegglen said.
"for a government to take the view that it wants to keep order
in utilities markets is not an unusual and/or unreasonable
following is the text of a statement
by the group of seven -- the u.s., japan, west germany, france,
britain, italy and canada -- issued after a washington meeting
1. the finance ministers and central bank governors of
seven major industrial countries met today.
they continued the process of multilateral surveillance of
their economies pursuant to the arrangements for strengthened
economic policy coordination agreed at the 1986 tokyo summit of
their heads of state or government.
the managing director of the international monetary fund
2. the ministers and governors reaffirmed the commitment to
the cooperative approach agreed at the recent paris meeting,
and noted the progress achieved in implementing the
undertakings embodied in the louvre agreement.
they agreed, however, that further actions will be
essential to resist rising protectionist pressures, sustain
global economic expansion, and reduce trade imbalances.
in this connection they welcomed the proposals just
announced by the governing liberal democratic party in japan
for extraordinary and urgent measures to stimulate japan's
economy through early implementation of a large supplementary
budget exceeding those of previous years, as well as
unprecedented front-end loading of public works expenditures.
the government of japan reaffirmed its intention to further
open up its domestic markets to foreign goods and services.
3. the ministers and governors reaffirmed the view that
around current levels their currencies are within ranges
broadly consistent with economic fundamentals and the basic
policy intentions outlined at the louvre meeting.
in that connection they welcomed the strong implementation
they concluded that present and prospective progress in
implementing the policy undertakings at the louvre and in this
statement provided a basis for continuing close cooperation to
foster the stability of exchange rates.
bank of france to hold money market tender today
the bank of france said it has invited
offers of first category paper today for a money market
money market operators were divided over whether the bank
of france will use to occasion to cut its intervention rate,
which has stood at 7-3/4 pct since march 9.
some thought a price cut unlikely while others said there
was room for a further 1/4 point cut by the bank.
rio tinto-zinc corp plc 1986 pretax profit 601.7 mln stg
rio tinto-zinc corp plc 1986 pretax profit 601.7 mln stg
rio tinto-zinc net attributable profit lower
div 16.5p making 23.5p vs 22p
pretax profit 601.7 mln stg vs 614.4 mln
net attributable profit 245 mln stg vs 257 mln
turnover 3.34 billion stg vs 3.09 billion
note - accounts have been restated
full name of company is rio tinto-zinc corp plc &lt;rtzl.l>
group operating profit 529.4 mln stg vs 470.7 mln
operating costs 2.81 billion stg 2.63 billion
share of profit less losses of related companies 104.4 mln
interest receivable/other income 41.5 mln stg vs 47.4 mln
interest payable 73.6 mln stg vs 68.7 mln
tax 274.8 mln stg vs 277.1 mln
leaving 326.9 mln stg vs 337.3 mln
rtz' investment in australian associate cra has been equity
accounted for 1986 and 1985 figures restated on the same basis
after the reduction of rtz's interest to 49 pct in october
burmah oil 1986 pre-tax profit 105.9 mln stg vs 79.6 mln.
burmah oil 1986 pre-tax profit 105.9 mln stg vs 79.6 mln.
german bankers' remarks revive talk of rate cut
remarks by two leading central bankers
sparked renewed speculation in financial markets that a cut in
the west german three pct discount rate may be under
bundesbank board member claus koehler said in a speech that
monetary growth resulting from speculative capital inflows
separately, west berlin state central bank president dieter
hiss told journalists that the discount rate could fall below
its lowest ever point of 2.75 pct. he made clear that he was
not making a forecast on interest rates, however.
currency dealers here and in the far east said the dollar
gained slight background support from the speculation.
but german dealers noted that the bundesbank kept the 3.80
pct rate unchanged at which it offered liquidity to the money
market this week, dashing some expectations that it may either
offer lower fixed rate money or offer a reduced minimum rate
and let the strength of banks' demands set the allocation rate.
it allocated 6.1 billion marks in new liquidity, much less
than the 14.9 billion leaving the market as a prior pact
expired. this further weakened sentiment the bundesbank could
move to a more accommodative monetary stance, dealers said.
koehler said in a speech in surrey, england, speculative
capital inflows may cause monetary growth, regardless of
whether central banks intervened or exchange rates fell.
"in other words, the monetary policy measures required are
different from -- and sometimes diametrically opposed to --
those needed when the money stock is increasing as a result of
though koehler was known to be the most liberal of the
generally monetarist bundesbank board, his comments marked the
first time cuts in rates had been concretely suggested as a
counterpoint to overly strong monetary growth, dealers said.
soviet trade deficit with west soars in 1986
the soviet trade deficit with the west
almost quadrupled last year, reaching 2.72 billion roubles
compared with 713 mln in 1985, official figures showed.
statistics published by the monthly journal foreign trade
showed soviet trade turnover for 1986 fell to 130.9 billion
roubles from 142.1 billion the previous year, a drop of 7.8
moscow's trade surplus with east bloc countries continued
western analysts attributed the deficit rise with the west
to the world oil price slump, which hit moscow's main export
and cut hard currency earnings needed for purchases in the
burmah oil profit climbs to 105.9 mln stg
final div 9.5p, making 14p vs 12.75p.
pre-tax profit 105.9 mln stg vs 79.6 mln.
net profit before minorities 56 mln vs 52.1 mln.
turnover net of duties 1.32 billion stg vs 1.46 billion.
extraordinary debit 20.4 mln vs 28.2 mln.
note: company's full name is the burmah oil co plc &lt;burm.l>
china's wheat crop threatened by pests, disease
pests and disease, which destroyed 1.1
mln tonnes of wheat in china in 1986, are threatening crops on
11.64 mln hectares this year, the china daily said.
about 14.54 mln hectares of wheat were affected in 1986.
the paper said abnormal weather conditions had encouraged
the spread of wheat midges in 2.47 mln hectares in shanxi,
henan, sichuan, anhui, hebei and jiangsu.
in henan, shandong and hebei wheat aphids are affecting
4.67 mln hectares, wheat red mite 2.8 mln hectares and wheat
rtz sees rising u.s. output aiding 1987 results
rio tinto-zinc corp plc &lt;rtzl.l>, rtz,
said the predicted rise in industrial production in the u.s.
and europe should boost its 1987 performance.
consumption of some base metals and their dlr prices are
showing signs of improvement, although iron ore markets have
weakened. the oil price in u.s. dlrs is above the 1986 average,
and if sustained, should improve energy earnings.
the company was commenting in a statement on its 1986
results which, on a restated basis, showed net attributable
profits lower at 245 mln stg after 257 mln the previous year.
pretax profits also dipped to 601.7 mln stg after 614.4 mln.
rtz said the excellent performance of its expanding range
of industrial businesses in 1986 was offset by the collapse in
industrial businesses contributed 202 mln stg to net
profit, a 40 pct increase from 144 mln in 1985, and 60 pct of
the total. trading performance improved at wholly-owned
subsidiaries rtz borax ltd, rtz cement ltd, rtz chemicals ltd
and rtz pillar ltd. first time contributions from recent
investment and acquisitions mainly in speciality chemicals and
metals activities contributed 83 mln stg to net profit.
bridgestone corp &lt;brit.t> year to december 31
group shr 35.99 yen vs 38.28
net 21.01 billion vs 21.08 billion
current 47.73 billion vs 48.06 billion
operating 55.04 billion vs 54.99 billion
sales 792.71 billion vs 864.28 billion
note - company forecast for current year is group shr 37.70
yen, net 22 billion, current 52 billion and sales 800 billion.
ec sugar tender seen marking no change in policy
the maximum export rebate granted at
yesterday's ec sugar tender marked no change in policy over
producer complaints that they are not obtaining the ec
intervention price in exporting sugar outside the community, ec
the maximum rebate was 46.496 ecus per 100 kilos for
118,350 tonnes of sugar, down from 46.864 ecus the previous
week, but the change is explained by world market conditions.
producers claim the rebate was short of the level needed to
obtain a price equivalent to the intervention price by over one
ecu per 100 kilos, and was 0.87 ecu short the previous week,
they said this was despite the fact that the commission had
to accept 785,000 tonnes of sugar into intervention from
operators protesting that rebates are too low.
operators have now until early may to withdraw this sugar.
but they have not given any sign of planned withdrawals unless
the commission reviews its export policy, they said.
the current year has opened well, with
trading prospects remaining favourable, burmah oil co plc
&lt;burm.l> said in a statement with its 1986 results.
the company plans to maintain a steady rate of investment
in its marketing operations and to obtain improved profit
margins on its liquified natural gas, lng, project.
burmah has the financial capacity to continue making
acquisitions within its business sectors, it added. the
rationalisation programme, including sale of the bahamas oil
terminal and all peripheral activities, is now complete.
pre-tax profit for 1986 rose to 105.9 mln stg from 79.6
gebrueder sulzer 1986 profit up almost 60 pct
consolidated net profit 67 mln swiss francs vs 42 mln.
dividend 100 francs per registered share vs 80 francs and
10 francs per participation certificate vs eight.
consolidated turnover 4.55 billion francs vs 4.54 billion.
parent company net profit 38.2 mln francs vs 26.4 mln.
parent company turnover 2.20 billion francs vs 2.29
note - company's full name is gebrueder sulzer ag &lt;sulz.z>
japan business leaders say g-7 accord is worrying
the leaders of two of japan's top business
groups said in separate statements the group of seven (g-7)
accord reached in washington yesterday is of deep concern to
japan because it shows the major industrial nations regard the
eishiro saito, chairman of the federation of economic
organizations (keidanren), said the yen's present rate is well
above adequate levels. he did not elaborate.
takashi ishihara, chairman of the japan committee for
economic development, said the accord will not prevent the yen
"we do not understand why the g-7 approved present rates as
the yen has risen excessively since the paris accord," ishihara
g-7 members britain, canada, france, italy, japan, the u.s.
and west germany said in a statement they consider their
currencies are now within ranges broadly consistent with
saito called on each g-7 member nation to prepare to
intervene in the market strongly enough to ensure exchange
rates are stabilised at appropriate levels.
pergamon holdings reduces bpcc and hollis stakes
&lt;pergamon holdings ltd> and its associate
companies said that they had sold 30 mln ordinary shares in the
british printing and communication corp plc &lt;bpcl.l> and 10.5
mln in &lt;hollis plc> together with other securities.
no total price was given but the company said the proceeds
of the sales would be used to fund pergamon's expansion
programme and worldwide acquisition stategy. the company said
that following these sales pergamon's ordinary shareholdings in
both bpcc and hollis remained above 51 pct. it said it had no
intention of further reducing its holdings in either company.
net profit 635.5 mln guilders vs 603.4 mln.
revenues 17.35 billion guilders vs 17.27 billion.
net profit per nominal 2.50 guilder share 5.79 guilders vs
5.67, corrected for capital increase. (1985 uncorrected figure
dividend 2.50 guilders vs 2.38, corrected. (2.40
note - full name is nationale nederlanden nv &lt;ntnn.as>
shanghai tyreb factory to raise 30 mln u.s. dlrs
ta chung hua rubber factory of
shanghai will raise a 30 to 35 mln u.s. dlr loan to expand and
modernise its plant, arranger ccic finance ltd said.
the loan, to be lead managed by the bank of china, is
expected to mature in eight to nine years, but terms have not
the money will be used to import manufacturing equipment
including technology transfer for the production of truck
radial tyres. part of the output will be exported.
the expansion program is expected to cost a total 54 mln
dlrs. the shortfall will be financed domestically.
saudi rates rise as bahrain banks caught short
saudi riyal interest rates rose as
bahrain-based banks scrambled to cover short positions, dealers
several bahrain banks had been lending in the fixed periods
and borrowing in the short dates, but today they found the
day-to-day money in short supply, dealers said.
"everybody's stuck in the spot-next," one trader said.
spot-next rose to as high as 6-1/4, six pct from 5-1/4,
five pct yesterday, and the borrowing interest spilled over
into the periods, with one month rising to around 6-3/16,
5-15/16 pct from 5-15/16, 7/8 pct yesterday.
three months edged up to around 6-9/16, 5/16 pct from
6-7/16, 1/4 pct, while six months was quoted a touch firmer by
some banks at seven, 6-3/4 pct.
commercial banks quoted the spot riyal at 3.7500/04 to the
belgium to issue gold warrants, sources say
belgium plans to issue swiss franc
warrants to buy gold, with credit suisse as lead manager,
no confirmation or further details were immediately
philippine telephone firm plans stock split
the philippine long distance telephone co
&lt;pldt.mn> is planning a two-for-one stock split and a 20 pct
stock dividend later this year to reduce excess market
buoyancy, vice-president sennen lazo told reuters.
lazo said the stock split would reduce the par value of the
company's common stock from 10 to five pesos.
he said the stock split would apply to holders of about 18
mln common shares of stock on the record date of september 15
1987. "the exercise should make our stock more marketable," lazo
said. "now it is beyond the reach of many small investors."
pldt common stock surged from a low of 37 pesos in february
1986 to 367.50 at close of trading yesterday on the manila
lazo said the 20 pct stock dividend, payable on october 15,
would also apply to stockholders on record as of september 15.
pldt reported 1986 net income of 1.89 billion pesos, up 68
pct from 778.9 mln pesos in 1985, on operating revenues of six
billion pesos, up from 4.7 billion pesos in 1985.
at end december 1986 the company had 417,100 stockholders.
a pldt spokesman said the company's profits are likely to
be substantial since the government raised its franchise tax to
three pct from two and to impose a 35 pct corporate income tax
from which it was previously exempt.
the government has not so far ordered the implementation of
pldt is the largest of 58 telephone companies in the
philippines. on december 31 1986 the company had 856,014
telephones in operation, representing 94 pct of all instruments
in manila item "philippine telephone firm plans stock split"
please read in page 3, first para, "the company's profits are
likely to be substantially cut" (inserting dropped word). this
replaces  "the company's profits are likely to be substantial"
cargill confirms white sugar sale to india
confirmed it sold one cargo of white sugar to india for
shipment april 15/may 15 at yesterday's tender.
price details were not immediately available but some
traders suggested business had been done around 220 dlrs a
india tendered for one or two cargoes of white sugar. there
was no specific requirement on shipping period.
malaysia seeks 42 billion yen pipeline loan
malaysia has asked japan for a 42
billion yen 25-year loan to finance the construction of gas
pipelines from eastern trengganu to southern johor, the
overseas economic cooperation fund (oecf) said.
oecf's chief representative, takashi matsuya, told
reporters the japanese government is appraising the loan.
another oecf official told reuters japan is likely to approve
the loan because "it is technically and economically viable."
if approved, the loan would carry a coupon rate of four
pct, a grace period of seven years, matsuya said. it would be
disbursed over three years, he added.
the pipeline contruction is the second phase of the
peninsular gas utilisation project by petronas, malaysia's
the first phase was the supply of gas to households in and
around the eastern oil town of kertih.
ccf reports 34.8 pct profit boost, share split seen
reported a parent company net profit up 34.8 pct to 140.1 mln
francs from 103.9 mln francs a few weeks before its
denationalisation around the end of this month.
official sources said the bank, france's sixth largest in
terms of its deposits and seventh in terms of its assets,
planned a share split to increase the number of shares on offer
ahead of the sale of 40 pct of its ordinary share capital to
the public, of 10 pct to staff and 20 pct abroad.
previously one of france's biggest private banks, it was
nationalised by the socialists in 1982.
the sources said it was too early to give details of the
planned split or of the share price, but cited april 27 as a
likely date for the flotation launch.
so far 30 pct of the group's capital, currently at 10.33
mln shares of 100 francs nominal, has been offered for sale to
large private investors to constitute a solid core of eight to
the private tender offer closes on april 16, while a 12 mln
franc advertising campaign for the flotation begins on sunday.
"the privatisation will be a way of attracting extra clients,"
ccf deputy director-general rene de la serre told reuters.
market sources put the total value of ccf's privatisation
at between four and five billion francs.
de la serre said the bank was likely to attract at least
the same number of investors as &lt;sogenal>, another recently
privatised bank in which 850,000 people bought shares.
the government's sweeping privatisation programme has also
included the sale of saint-gobain &lt;sgep.pa>, and cie financiere
de paribas &lt;pari.pa>. the sale of &lt;banque du batiment et des
travaux publics> and &lt;banque industrielle et mobiliere privee>
should be completed this month, while third largest french bank
societe generale &lt;sgen.pa> will be privatised later this year.
following platinum group base prices (unfabricated), all u.s.
lex service buys sears motor group
lex service plc &lt;lexl.l> said it had
acquired &lt;sears motor group ltd>, the retail motor distribution
arm of sears plc &lt; sehl.l>, and an 11.9 mln stg loan note
payable by sears motor for 33.4 mln stg.
the purchase will be through 1.4 mln stg in cash and the
issue to sears plc of 8.0 mln new lex ordinary shares.
the company said in a statement that immediately following
the acquisition of the motor group, its car and commercial
vehicle contract hire fleet of some 3,000 vehicles was sold to
&lt;lex vehicle leasing ltd> for 14.3 mln stg in cash, a sum equal
to the net book value of the vehicles transferred.
lex vehicle is owned equally by lex services and &lt;lombard
lex said the shares involved in the transaction were today
being placed for sears plc with institutions at 400p. these
shares will not qualify for the final lex dividend on 10 april.
lex said in a statement that its acquisition of sears motor
group represents a major development for its automotive
activities. the enlarged retailing operations of the lex
automotive group now have a turnover of 530 mln stg. lex's
existing automotive interests include volvo concessionaires,
the sole importer of volvo cars and parts into the u.k.
lex said the turnover for sears motor group in the year to
31 december 1986 was 242 mln stg and that at the date of the
acquisition the group had about 50 mln stg in external
lex shares fell on the announcement to trade around 409p
major rubber producers to meet in singapore
singapore and, perhaps, thailand will meet here tomorrow to
discuss increased regional cooperation on rubber marketing and
ways to raise rubber prices, industry sources said.
the officials will discuss linking rubber markets in the
four countries to improve price transparency, the sources said.
this is the first time indonesia is attending such a
meeting, they said, but representatives from thailand may not
be able to attend because of their tight schedule. malaysia,
indonesia and thailand account for 90 pct of world rubber
exports and singapore is a major regional rubber trading
the malaysian rubber futures market, freighting and
contracts for rubber are among other issues expected to be
last month, rubber importing and exporting countries
adopted a new international natural rubber agreement in geneva.
the new pact is more responsive to market trends than its
predecessor, the sources said, and earlier provisions allowing
the buffer stock to borrow from banks have been eliminated.
mepc plc &lt;mepc.l> said that its offer for
&lt;oldham estates ltd> would remain open until further notice.
on february 26 mepc made an agreed bid for oldham based on
a formula reflecting its asset value at 30 september 1986. a
year earlier oldham's net asset value was put at 531.4 mln stg.
as of 1 april the valuation used under the formula had
still to be agreed so oldham had yet to give a firm
recommendation to its shareholders regarding the value of the
george wimpey profits up 42 pct to 66.5 mln stg
div 3.75p vs 2.9p making 4.75p vs 3.75p
pretax profit 66.5 mln stg vs 46.9 mln
tax 14.6 mln stg vs 4.5 mln
net profit 51.9 mln stg vs 42.4 mln
turnover 1.44 billion stg vs 1.58 billion
note - full name of company is george wimpey plc &lt;wmpy.l>.
operating profit before exceptional items 88.9 mln stg vs
exceptional debits 3.0 mln stg vs 11.6 mln
operating profit 85.9 mln stg vs 68.9 mln
share of profits less losses of associated companies 1.4
mln stg vs 2.4 mln loss
interest - net payable 20.8 mln stg vs 19.6 mln
attributable minority profits debits 0.2 mln stg vs 0.3 mln
extraordinary items debit 3.4 mln stg vs 4.3 mln credit
net borrowings 195.1 mln stg vs 193.5 mln
canada february trade surplus 1.25 billion dlrs after
canada february trade surplus 1.25 billion dlrs after
aegon 1986 net profit rises 6.4 pct
net profit 327.1 mln guilders vs
total revenue 7.97 billion guilders vs 8.7 billion.
net profit per five guilder nominal share 9.33 guilder vs
final dividend 1.30 guilders and 2.4 pct stock vs 1.30
guilders and 2.2 pct in stock. interim dividend already paid
note : full name of company is aegon nv &lt;aegn.as>
canada february trade surplus 1.2 billion dlrs
canada had a trade surplus of 1.25
billion dlrs in february compared with an upward revised 623
mln dlrs surplus in january, statistics canada said.
the january surplus originally was reported at 533 mln
dlrs. the february surplus last year was 189 mln dlrs.
february exports, seasonally adjusted, were 10.44 billion
dlrs against 9.85 billion in january and 10.05 billion in
february imports were 9.19 billion dlrs against 9.23
billion in january and 9.86 billion in february, 1986.
bank of japan buys dollars in tokyo, dealers say
the bank of japan bought a modest amount
of dollars at around 145.10 yen just after the market here
just before the opening, the dollar dropped swiftly as
speculators concluded the group of seven (g-7) comminuique
issued in washington contained nothing basically new, they
said. it fell about a half yen, to around 145.
the g-7 reaffirmed that their currencies around current
one dealer said the bank of japan probably intervened in
australia before the opening here, but could not confirm this.
miyazawa says yen still inside paris range
miyazawa said the strengthening of the yen against the dollar
that has occurred since the paris agreement was within the
range agreed on in the louvre discussions.
"i would say that what has happened (to the yen) in the past
several weeks was not outside the range we agreed to in the
discussions in paris," miyazawa told a press conference
following the group of seven meeting here.
he added that the current discussions were a "reaffirmation"
of that agreement, indicating that the "solidarity" that occurred
in paris was still in place.
u.k. money market gets 103 mln stg help
the bank of england said it operated in
the money market this morning, buying 103 mln stg bank bills.
the central bank bought in band one 60 mln stg at 9-7/8, in
band two eight mln at 9-13/16, in band three 26 mln at 9-3/4
and in band four nine mln stg at 9-11/16 pct.
this compares with the bank's forecast of a 400 mln stg
natned forecasts 1987 results in line with 1986
nationale nederlanden nv &lt;nttn.as> (natned) said it expected at
least unchanged results in 1987 after reporting 1986 net
profits up 5.3 pct to 635.5 mln guilders from 603.4 mln in
revenues increased by 0.5 pct to 17.35 billion guilders
after 17.27 billion the previous year, and the dividend was
raised to 2.50 guilders per share from 2.38 guilders in 1985,
the company said guilder revenue and profit were pressured
by falls in exchange rates, particularly in the us and
without these currency fluctuations, net profit would have
been 30.7 mln guilders higher and revenue 1.97 billion higher,
the international share in turnover was 50 pct in 1986
compared with 52 pct in 1985.
the company's life insurance result fell to 365.7 mln
guilders after 428.4 mln in 1985 due to currency influences,
tighter interest margins and increased investment.
claim payouts fell to 9.9 mln guilders after 66.6 mln the
the company's total assets reached 69.87 billion guilders
in 1986 against 67 billion the year before.
assets per share equalled 65.68 guilders against 65.53.
without these currency fluctuations, net profit would have
been 30.7 mln guilders higher and revenue 1.97 billion higher,
the international share in turnover was 50 pct in 1986
compared with 52 pct in 1985.
the company's life insurance result fell to 365.7 mln
european markets react quietly to g-7 communique
to the g-7 communique, with comments from bankers and dealers
ranging from disappointment that it was not more concrete to
surprise that the markets should have expected so much.
the dollar opened lower against virtually all currencies
and traded in a narrow range after the communique, which
reaffirmed support for the paris accord on currency
stabilisation but contained no moves to strengthen it.
dealers in frankfurt and zurich saw the dollar remaining
broadly entrenched in its current trading range.
"the dollar is likely to stay within a range of 1.80 to 1.84
marks," said gisela steinhaeuser, senior dealer at chase bank
ag. she said there was some resistance to further climbs.
however, she said the dollar could break out of the range
with major surprises such as a worse-than-expected u.s.
merchandise trade deficit, due next tuesday.
theodor stadelmann, dealer with bank julius baer and co ltd
in zurich, said he expects the dollar to hold steady against
the mark and swiss franc but to weaken further against the yen,
a milan banker shared stadelmann's view, saying he expects
a dollar-yen range of 140-150 in the short term.
london traders said the g-7 communique failed to curb
underlying bearishness toward the dollar but this negative
sentiment was not yet strong enough to tempt interbank
concern that finance ministers and officials still in
washington could issue more concrete statements in favour of
currency stabilisation kept players sidelined, along with
worries about provoking fresh central bank intervention in the
most paris dealers expressed disappointment at the
communique, saying nothing has changed to reverse the dollar's
traders in several centres said the market would look for
fresh opportunities to test the willingness of central banks to
defend current ranges, which the communique said were "broadly
consistent with economic fundamentals and the basic policy
intentions outlined at the louvre meeting."
dave jouhin, senior dealer at midland bank in london, said
"they're going to put somebody's resolve to the test soon." the
u.s. february trade data may provide the trigger, dealers said.
however, some dealers said london-based operators would be
unlikely to open major positions next week ahead of the long
easter weekend. they saw near-term technical support at 1.825
marks and 145 yen and resistance about 1.83 marks and 146 yen.
chase bank's steinhaeuser and other frankfurt dealers said
the g-7 communique guaranteed a relatively calm and stable
market for the foreseeable future compared with the extreme
volatility seen in the first few months of this year.
one dealer at a german bank said the wording of the
communique made clear the leading nations did not want a
further dollar drop, and this was supporting the dollar.
the german dealer saw the dollar gradually appreciating to
1.87 marks, broadly seen as its upper limit within the louvre
a swiss bank economist said he believed the markets were
ready for a period of "mainly sideways movement."
but milan dealers were sceptical about the communique
"nothing has changed substantially to give the dollar a big
boost," said one dealer, while another italian banker said he
expects the dollar to trade between 1.77 and 1.87 german marks
a swiss monetary source, who asked not to be named, said
the communique had been in line with realistic expectations and
"the problem is that the changes needed in fiscal and trade
policies to redress current imbalances are of a different
timescale than currency markets operate on," the source told
reuters, "this is a political process which takes time."
alois schwietert, chief economist at swiss bank corp in
basle, also questioned the tone of disappointment evident on
currency markets today. "did people really expect a patent
bank economists in paris noted yesterday's meeting was only
the first in a series and said the market would watch carefully
in the next few weeks for any changes in positions.
a senior economist with banque indosuez said the focus was
now on trade and growth rather than interest rates. any move by
japan and west germany to boost their economic growth could
lead to a quick change in the u.s. position.
dealers in all centres agreed that markets would be wary in
pushing the dollar too far too quickly in the coming months
while central banks appear resolved to use their muscle to
german money market split on lower rate prospects
remarks by central bankers raised some
hopes the bundesbank will cut rates on securities repurchase
pacts, but operators remained divided on the likelihood of a
move in the near term, money market dealers said.
comments by bundesbank board member claus koehler yesterday
that rate cuts were needed to curb money supply growth from
speculative capital inflows, and by west berlin state central
bank president dieter hiss that there was no natural lower
limit to the discount rate had, however, no immediate impact.
call money declined to 3.65/75 pct from 3.75/85 pct but the
drop was tied to extra liquidity in the market, dealers said.
dealers said the bundesbank's latest liquidity allotment
this week dashed some hopes of lower rates.
the bundesbank allotted only 6.1 billion marks yesterday in
new liquidity in a repurchase pact at an unchanged rate of 3.80
pct, thus subtracting some 8.8 billion marks from the market,
as an outgoing 14.9 billion pact expired.
but some dealers said the smaller volume awarded by the
pact was in line with present liquid money market conditions,
and did not exlude a cut in the repurchase pact rate soon to
3.70 pct if money market rates continue at present levels.
the next opportunity for the bundesbank to lower rates on
repurchase pacts will be in a tender expected next tuesday.
bundesbank officials have already said they favour more
discreet rate adjustments through repurchase pacts, rather than
the more public adjustment of leading rates.
the bundesbank may either set a fixed allocation rate and
allow banks to tender for the volume, as has been the case
since it lowered its discount rate january 22, or else it may
allow banks to tender for the rate and set the volume itself.
dealers expect volume of the tender to be lower than the
15.2 billion marks flowing out, to offset other incoming funds.
some seven billion marks is expected to flow in next week.
this should then flow back into the market as it is deposited
banks were well supplied with liquidity, holding 61.5
billion marks in reserves at the bundesbank on tuesday.
holdings of average daily reserves over the first seven
days of april stood at 59.6 billion marks, still above the
estimated 51 billion required for all of april.
thailand to renew long term sugar contracts -trade
thailand is to negotiate tomorrow with
selected trade houses for renewal of long term raw sugar sales
contracts, to cover the next five years at a rate of 60,000
they also reported vague talk algeria may be seeking 50,000
tonnes of raws tomorrow but details are unclear.
ec launches anti-dumping probe on japanese chips
investigation into allegations of dumping by japanese
semiconductor makers in a move which diplomats said could mark
an intensification of world trade strains.
tokyo already faces a deadline of april 17 from washington
for the imposition of 300 mln dlrs worth of tariffs on chips it
the ec executive commission said today the european
electrical component manufacturers association complained that
japanese firms were selling high capacity eprom type (erasable
programmable read only memory) chips at unfairly low prices.
japan last year took 78 pct of the 170 mln dlr ec eprom
market, up from 60 pct in 1984. the ec firms said they had been
forced to offer their products at a discount of up to 30 pct in
order to compete with the japanese.
the commission said it believed the association had given
sufficient elements of proof for dumping to warrant an
investigation, which could lead it to impose duties if it found
the commission claims last year's accord between the u.s.
and japan on microchip pricing gives u.s. firms privileged
swiss to launch new series of money market paper
the swiss federal government will launch
a new series of three month money market certificates totalling
around 150 mln swiss francs, the national bank said.
subscriptions close april 14 and payment date is april 16.
the last series of three month paper issued in march raised
147.3 mln francs at an issue price of 99.142 pct, giving an
average annual yield of 3.501 pct.
european markets react quietly to g-7 communique
to the g-7 communique, with comments from bankers and dealers
ranging from disappointment that it was not more concrete to
surprise that the markets should have expected so much.
the dollar opened lower against virtually all currencies
and traded in a narrow range after the communique, which
reaffirmed support for the paris accord on currency
stabilisation but contained no moves to strengthen it.
frankfurt and zurich dealers saw the dollar staying broadly
entrenched in its current trading range.
finance ministers agree on need for stability
industrialized nations agreed on the need to stabilize
currencies at current levels but said more action was needed to
reduce trade imbalances and sustain economic growth.
in a communique issued after a four-hour meeting at the
u.s. treasury that ended last night, the ministers said the
value of the dollar and other currencies was basically correct
now, and they welcomed new measures planned by the japanese to
west german finance minister gerhard stoltenberg called it
a "good meeting" and in brief remarks exchanged with reporters
other ministers seemed pleased with its outcome.
shortly after the communique was issued and just as foreign
exchange trading opened in tokyo, the bank of japan intervened
again to prevent the yen rising too quickly.
the communique said, "the ministers and governors reaffirmed
the commitment to the cooperative approach agreed at the recent
paris meeting. they agreed, however, that further actions will
be essential to resist rising protectionist pressures, sustain
global economic expansion and reduce trade imbalances."
it welcomed the plans set this week by the japan's ruling
liberal democratic party to stimulate its economy with what the
communique termed "extraordinary and urgent measures" including
an "unprecedented front-end loading of public works
the meeting of the so-called group of seven brought
together ministers and central bank governors of the seven
major industrial democracies, the united states, japan, west
germany, france, britain, italy and canada.
the communique said the ministers reaffirmed the commitment
on cooperation reached in a meeting on february 22 in paris
when they had agreed to stabilize foreign exchange rates at the
in the weeks that followed, the dollar continued to fall
against the japanese yen despite massive dollar purchases by
the bank of japan and other central banks and is now trading at
japan has come under growing criticism from both the united
states and european countries for its only modest efforts to
open its markets to outside competition and to reduce its
the communique said japan affirmed its intention to open
domestic markets to foreign goods and services but did not
it said the officials "reaffirmed the view that around
current levels their currencies are within ranges broadly
consistent with economic fundamentals and the basic policy
intentions outlined at the louvre meeting."
aegon expects moderate rise in 1987 profits
reported a 6.4 pct increase in 1986 net profits to 327.1 mln
guilders and said it expected a moderate increase in profits
total revenue was eight pct lower in 1986 at 7.97 billion
guilders vs 8.7 billion guilders in 1985. the company said its
revenues were down due to lower foreign exchange rates and a
change in accounting practice. it added that revenues would
have risen by about seven pct had those changes not occurred.
revenue from dutch operations rose five pct in 1986, mainly
due to its life insurance business.
health insurance revenues in the netherlands also rose
despite a notable shift to insurances with lower premiums and
damage insurances made losses, mainly due to car damage
insurances. aegon did not specify the loss.
in the united states, revenue in guilders from health and
life insurance was lower. aegon said this was due to a change
aegon said annuities are subject to such strong personal
investment influences that it should be accounted differently
this change in accounting practice and another change to
account for profits made on fixed interest investments,
resulted in an incidental rise in net profits of 31 mln
aegon said incidental negative influences on net profits
were slightly higher, being the lower dollar rate, high initial
costs for new products, and the cost of new headquarters in the
in 1986, a large number of new insurance products emerged
in the netherlands and the u.s., aegon said. large initial
costs for these products have depressed net profits somewhat.
monumental corp, a u.s. insurer which merged with aegon in
may 1986, saw its profits almost completely eroded by these
costs and made only a small contribution to the group's
aegon said it has written-off 657 mln guilders in goodwill
aegon's net equity was 2.71 billion guilders in december
1986, against 3.46 billion the year before.
following is the text of a statement
by the group of seven -- the u.s., japan, west germany, france,
britain, italy and canada -- issued after a washington meeting
1. the finance ministers and central bank governors of
seven major industrial countries met today.
they continued the process of multilateral surveillance of
their economies pursuant to the arrangements for strengthened
economic policy coordination agreed at the 1986 tokyo summit of
their heads of state or government.
the managing director of the international monetary fund
2. the ministers and governors reaffirmed the commitment to
the cooperative approach agreed at the recent paris meeting,
and noted the progress achieved in implementing the
undertakings embodied in the louvre agreement.
they agreed, however, that further actions will be
essential to resist rising protectionist pressures, sustain
global economic expansion, and reduce trade imbalances.
in this connection they welcomed the proposals just
announced by the governing liberal democratic party in japan
for extraordinary and urgent measures to stimulate japan's
economy through early implementation of a large supplementary
budget exceeding those of previous years, as well as
unprecedented front-end loading of public works expenditures.
the government of japan reaffirmed its intention to further
open up its domestic markets to foreign goods and services.
3. the ministers and governors reaffirmed the view that
around current levels their currencies are within ranges
broadly consistent with economic fundamentals and the basic
policy intentions outlined at the louvre meeting.
in that connection they welcomed the strong implementation
they concluded that present and prospective progress in
implementing the policy undertakings at the louvre and in this
statement provided a basis for continuing close cooperation to
foster the stability of exchange rates.
g-7 wants to show markets its resolve - miyazawa
miyazawa said the group of seven (g-7) countries reaffirmed
their paris accord on stabilising currencies to convince the
at a news conference after today's g-7 meeting, miyazawa
said the ministers and central bank governors did not believe a
the speculative selling did not reflect economic
fundamentals, and since the fundamentals had not changed only a
reaffirmation of the goals of the paris accord was needed, he
he also noted that this test of the g-7 nations resolve had
concentrated on the yen, while other currencies, especially the
miyazawa said any change in economic conditions since the
paris accord was not worth being called fundamental.
"as i said at a time of louvre (agreement), the expression
of 'current level' is rather vague idea," he said.
the yen's movement in the past several weeks is within the
range agreed in paris in febraury, he said.
it was better to give a vague expression than pin-pointing
a level, which could have an adverse impact on the market,
asked why only japan was committed to fresh measures in the
statement, he said japan was exceptional among the seven
because the yen appreciated against the dollar while other
major currencies largely have been stable.
he also said japan's ruling liberal democratic party has
justed adoped a package to reflate the economy while other
nations are not supposed to produce new measures in a short
miyazawa also said the u.s. sanctions against japanese
semiconductor products was not discussed through the g-7
meeting and did not affect the currency talks.
the seven nations discussed the debt problems of developing
countries and ways to proceed in line with the debt initiative
outlined by u.s. treasury secretary james baker 18 months ago.
yen seen rising after g-7 communique
the yen is likely to start another
uneven rise against the dollar and other major currencies
because the group of seven communique contained nothing new,
currency and bond analysts here said.
"is that it? i was expecting something more than that," said
one trader at a major wall street securities company.
marc cohen of republic national bank of new york said: "the
market now has the impetus to drive the dollar lower again."
the dollar hovered between 145.50 and 147 yen in the days
just before the talks. dealers restrained their underlying
bearishness and squared positions ahead of wednesday's meeting
of the finance ministers and central bankers of the top seven
after more than four hours of talks, the g-7 issued a
communique which merely reaffirmed the recent paris agreement's
view that prevailing currency levels were broadly consistent
with economic fundamentals and that exchange rate stability
should be fostered around these levels.
the dollar sank to 144.75 yen in early tokyo trading.
"they said that the dollar/yen rate was broadly in line with
fundamentals when it was 154. now they are saying it's in line
when it's at 146. will this still be so at 138 or 130?," asked
japanese finance minister kiichi miyazawa fuelled
speculation about the amount of fluctuation the authorities are
prepared to tolerate by saying that the current yen level is
still inside the range agreed on in paris in late february.
official statements in recent weeks had indicated that the
key psychological level of 150 yen was at the lower end of the
dealers and analysts warned that the dollar's decline would
probably be uneven. they anticipated a concerted effort to prop
up the dollar and restrain the yen via a mixture of open market
shortly after the tokyo market opened today the bank of
japan was detected by local dealers buying moderate amounts of
dollars. the dollar rebounded to about 145.20 yen.
the sources said the market may also be wary of agressively
selling dollars for yen before tuesday's february u.s. trade
data. the figures are expected to show a deficit of 13 billion
dlrs, from a provisional 14.8 billion in january.
japan business leaders say g-7 accord is worrying
the leaders of two of japan's top business
groups said in separate statements the group of seven (g-7)
accord reached in washington yesterday is of deep concern to
japan because it shows the major industrial nations regard the
eishiro saito, chairman of the federation of economic
organizations (keidanren), said the yen's present rate is well
above adequate levels. he did not elaborate.
takashi ishihara, chairman of the japan committee for
economic development, said the accord will not prevent the yen
"we do not understand why the g-7 approved present rates as
the yen has risen excessively since the paris accord," ishihara
g-7 members britain, canada, france, italy, japan, the u.s.
and west germany said in a statement they consider their
currencies are now within ranges broadly consistent with
saito called on each g-7 member nation to prepare to
intervene in the market strongly enough to ensure exchange
rates are stabilised at appropriate levels.
qtly div five cts vs five cts prior
net profit 2,529,000 vs loss 1,066,000
revs 59.0 mln vs 52.6 mln
net profit 15.4 mln vs profit 865,000
revs 247.0 mln vs 231.1 mln
note: company became wholly owned and operated by donald
trump in may 1986, when he acquired 50 pct interest that had
been owned by former operator holiday corp &lt;hia>.
european markets react quietly to g-7 communique
to the g-7 communique, with comments from bankers and dealers
ranging from disappointment that it was not more concrete to
surprise that the markets should have expected so much.
the dollar opened lower against virtually all currencies
and traded in a narrow range after the communique, which
reaffirmed support for the paris accord on currency
stabilisation but contained no moves to strengthen it.
dealers in frankfurt and zurich saw the dollar remaining
broadly entrenched in its current trading range.
"the dollar is likely to stay within a range of 1.80 to 1.84
marks," said gisela steinhaeuser, senior dealer at chase bank
ag. she said there was some resistance to further climbs.
however, she said the dollar could break out of the range
with major surprises such as a worse-than-expected u.s.
merchandise trade deficit, due next tuesday.
theodor stadelmann, dealer with bank julius baer and co ltd
in zurich, said he expects the dollar to hold steady against
the mark and swiss franc but to weaken further against the yen,
a milan banker shared stadelmann's view, saying he expects
a dollar-yen range of 140-150 in the short term.
london traders said the g-7 communique failed to curb
underlying bearishness toward the dollar but this negative
sentiment was not yet strong enough to tempt interbank
concern that finance ministers and officials still in
washington could issue more concrete statements in favour of
currency stabilisation kept players sidelined, along with
worries about provoking fresh central bank intervention in the
most paris dealers expressed disappointment at the
communique, saying nothing has changed to reverse the dollar's
traders in several centres said the market would look for
fresh opportunities to test the willingness of central banks to
defend current ranges, which the communique said were "broadly
consistent with economic fundamentals and the basic policy
intentions outlined at the louvre meeting."
dave jouhin, senior dealer at midland bank in london, said
"they're going to put somebody's resolve to the test soon." the
u.s. february trade data may provide the trigger, dealers said.
however, some dealers said london-based operators would be
unlikely to open major positions next week ahead of the long
easter weekend. they saw near-term technical support at 1.825
marks and 145 yen and resistance about 1.83 marks and 146 yen.
chase bank's steinhaeuser and other frankfurt dealers said
the g-7 communique guaranteed a relatively calm and stable
market for the foreseeable future compared with the extreme
volatility seen in the first few months of this year.
one dealer at a german bank said the wording of the
communique made clear the leading nations did not want a
further dollar drop, and this was supporting the dollar.
the german dealer saw the dollar gradually appreciating to
1.87 marks, broadly seen as its upper limit within the louvre
a swiss bank economist said he believed the markets were
ready for a period of "mainly sideways movement."
but milan dealers were sceptical about the communique
"nothing has changed substantially to give the dollar a big
boost," said one dealer, while another italian banker said he
expects the dollar to trade between 1.77 and 1.87 german marks
west german beet plantings delayed three weeks
sugar beet plantings in west germany by up to three weeks, the
a ministry spokesman said in some central areas, especially
in the rhineland, farmers have taken advantage of warmer
weather and started plantings in the past two days.
west german planting intentions this year are put at
381,000 hectares, down from 390,500 ha last year, he said,
adding that the 1980/1985 average was 405,000 ha.
said bergen-richards corp has exercised a warrant to buy
450,000 step-saver shares at two dlrs each.
it said warrants issued to the underwriter in its initial
public offering were exercised in march for an aggregate of
coast savings &lt;csa> in talks on buying bank
said it is in talks with the federal savings and loan insurance
corp on the acquisition of central savings and loan association
central, which operates 46 branches, has been under
management guidance of the fslic since may 1985.
coast said the acquisition would give it an entry into the
san joaquin valley market besides strengthening its presence in
the san diego, los angeles and orange counties areas.
bramall to acquire gelco for up to 26.3 mln dlrs
&lt;c.d. bramall plc> said in a statement
accompanying its annual results that it proposed to acquire
gelco u.k. for some 26.3 mln dlrs.
part of the cost will be met by the issue of 2.14 mln new
ordinary bramall shares which are being placed at 265p each.
the acquisition will be satisfied by an initial payment of
some 25.3 mln dlrs in cash with further payments of 500,000
dlrs up to a maximum 26.3 mln dlrs. these further payments will
only be made if profits achieved by gelco for the year ending
july 31, 1987 reach a certain level.
bramall shares were trading 6p lower at 278p.
belgium launches bonds with gold warrants
the kingdom of belgium is launching 100
mln swiss francs of seven year notes with warrants attached to
buy gold, lead mananger credit suisse said.
the notes themselves have a 3-3/8 pct coupon and are priced
at par. payment is due april 30, 1987 and final maturity april
each 50,000 franc note carries 15 warrants. two warrants
are required to allow the holder to buy 100 grammes of gold at
a price of 2,450 francs, during the entire life of the bond.
the latest gold price in zurich was 2,045/2,070 francs per
fao sees lower global wheat, grain output in 1987
the u.n. food and agriculture organisation
(fao) said global wheat and coarse grain output was likely to
fall in 1987 but supplies would remain adequate to meet demand.
fao said in its monthly food outlook bulletin total world
grain output was expected to fall 38 mln tonnes to 1,353 mln in
1987, due mainly to unusually high winter losses in the soviet
union, drought in china and reduced plantings in north america.
world cereal stocks at the end of 1986/87 were forecast to
rise 47 mln tonnes to a record 452 mln tonnes, softening the
impact of reduced production. but stocks are unevenly
distributed, with about 50 pct held by the u.s.
"thus the food security prospects in 1987/88 for many
developing countries, particularly in africa, depend crucially
on the outcome of this year's harvests," fao said.
fao said world cereal supplies in 1986/87 were estimated at
a record 2,113 mln tonnes, about five pct higher than last
season and due mainly to large stocks and a record 1986
harvest, estimated at 1,865 mln tonnes.
fao's forecast of 1986/87 world cereals trade was revised
upwards by eight mln tonnes to 179 mln due to the likelihood of
substantial buying by china and the soviet union.
cb and t bancshares inc &lt;cbtb> 1st qtr net
shr 27 cts vs 24 cts
avg shrs 19.7 mln vs 19.4 mln
note: results reflected pooled acquisition of first
community bancshares inc on march 31, 1987 and include camden
bancorp from january 31, 1987 purchase.
xicor inc &lt;xico> 1st qtr march 22 net
shr profit five cts vs loss 16 cts
net profit 689,000 vs loss 1,910,000
note: 1987 net includes 276,000 dlr tax credit.
george wimpey says benefits of restructuring seen
george wimpey plc &lt;wmpy.l> said  the
outlook for 1987 looked encouraging as the company realised the
it said its overall financial position showed further
improvement in 1986 and the reshaping of its u.k. business into
clearly defined and activity related divisions had been
wimpey was commenting in a statement on its 1986 results
which showed pretax profits up 42 pct to 66.5 mln stg.
the group had a good overall year in north america, the
c.o.m.b. co said it has acquired
the principal assets of national tech industries inc and telkom
corp, which are engaged in the sale and telemarketing of
consumer electronic merchandise and do business as house of
the company said it paid a total of 8,700,000 dlrs,
national tech had sales of about 23 mln dlrs for 1986, it
belgium launches bonds with gold warrants
the kingdom of belgium is launching 100
mln swiss francs of seven year notes with warrants attached to
buy gold, lead manager credit suisse said.
the notes themselves have a 3-3/8 pct coupon and are priced
at par. payment is due april 30, 1987, and final maturity april
each 50,000 franc note carries 15 warrants. two warrants
are required to allow the holder to buy 100 grammes of gold at
a price of 2,450 francs, during the entire life of the bond.
the latest gold price in zurich was 2,045/2,070 francs per
datatrak inc &lt;dtrk> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
shr profit nil vs profit nil
net profit 27,622 vs profit 5,556
shr loss one ct vs loss two cts
net loss 195,095 vs loss 445,379
miyazawa says yen still inside paris range
miyazawa said the strengthening of the yen against the dollar
since the paris agreement was within the range agreed in the
"i would say that what has happened (to the yen) in the past
several weeks was not outside the range we agreed to in the
discussions in paris," miyazawa told a press conference
following the group of seven meeting here.
he said the current discussions were a "reaffirmation" of
that agreement, saying the "solidarity" that occurred in paris
todd shipyards &lt;tod> struck on west coast
production workers represented by the multi-union pacific coast
metal trades district council at its san francisco division
it said negotiations are expected to resume at the end of
todd also said the collective bargaining division in effect
at its galveston division expires april 17, and negotiations
with the galveston metal trades council are continuing.
the company said results of balloting on a new collective
bargaining agreement proposal in its seattle division are
expected to be tabulated at the close of business tomorrow.
the pacific coast council has recommended acceptance of
that proposal by membership, todd said.
u.s. first time jobless claims fell in week
insurance benefits fell to a seasonally adjusted 338,000 in the
week ended march 28 from 355,000 in the prior week, the labor
the number of people actually receiving benefits under
regular state programs totaled 2,436,000 in the week ended
march 21, the latest period for which that figure was
that was down from 2,480,000 the previous week.
clevite industries says j.p. industries offered 13.50
dlrs a share to buy company
clevite industries says j.p. industries offered 13.50
dlrs a share to buy company
suntrust banks inc &lt;sti> 1st qtr net
shr 54 cts vs 49 cts
net 70.2 mln vs 64.0 mln
note: share adjusted for two-for-one split in july 1986.
results restated for pooled acquisition of third national
net chargeoffs 15.0 mln dlrs vs 14.2 mln dlrs.
assets 25.8 billion dlrs, up 7.2 pct from a year earlier,
deposits 21.1 billion, up 9.4 pct, and loans 17.1 billion dlrs,
international thomson to report in u.s. funds
said it will report financial results in u.s. funds rather than
sterling, beginning from jan 1, 1987.
it said the change will not be applied retroactively to
the company said as a result of recent investments, most of
its assets now are located in the united states.
philip crosby associates inc &lt;pcro> 4th qtr net
shr three cts vs 18 cts
shr 45 cts vs 69 cts
revs 45.1 mln vs 34.3 mln
colonial american bankshares corp &lt;cabk> 1st qtr
shr 52 cts vs 40 cts
qtly div 18 cts vs 15 cts prior
note: share adjusted for 10 pct stock dividend in november
dividend pay may one, record april 25.
rpt - argentine grain/oilseed export prices adjusted
minimum export prices of grain and oilseed products in dlrs per
tonne fob, previous in brackets, as follows:
sorghum 64 (63), sunflowerseed cake and expellers 103 (102)
, pellets 101 (100), meal 99 (98), linseed oil 274 (264),
groundnutseed oil 450 (445), soybean oil 300 (290), rapeseed
sunflowerseed oil for shipment through may 323 (313) and
the board also adjusted export prices at which export taxes
are levied in dlrs per tonne fob, previous in brackets, as
bran pollard wheat 40 (42), pellets 42 (44).
clevite &lt;clev> gets 13.50 dlr/shr offer
received a written proposal from j.p. industries inc &lt;jpi>
seeking to buy all of its outstanding shares for 13.50 dlrs a
clevite's stock was trading on nasdaq at 13-1/4.
j.p. industries recently completed the acquisition of
j.p. industries said its proposed transaction would be
financed through borrowings under its available bank lines and
a bridge financing facility which donaldson lufkin and jenrette
to expedite the transaction, j.p. industries said it would
be willing to start a cash tender for clevite's shares within
five days after agreeing upon a definitive merger and
confirmation of clevite's financial results and condition.
japan business leaders say g-7 accord worrying
the leaders of two of japan's top business
groups said in separate statements the group of seven (g-7)
accord reached in washington yesterday is of deep concern to
japan because it shows the major industrial nations regard the
eishiro saito, chairman of the federation of economic
organizations (keidanren), said the yen's present rate is well
above adequate levels. he did not elaborate.
takashi ishihara, chairman of the japan committee for
economic development, said the accord will not prevent the yen
"we do not understand why the g-7 approved present rates as
the yen has risen excessively since the paris accord," ishihara
about 3,314 head of cattle were
auctioned in liniers cattle market, against 13,952 on wednesday
and 9,217 last thursday, trade sources said.
maximun prices, in australes per kilo, with dollar
steers over 480 kilos   1.02(0.658) 1.015(0.654)
steers 460 to 480 kilos 1.05(0.677) 1.032(0.665)
cows for canning        0.56(0.361) 0.56 (0.361) reuter
u.k. money market deficit revised downward
the bank of england said it has revised
its estimate of today's shortfall to 350 mln stg from 400 mln,
before taking account of 103 mln stg morning assistance.
physio technology &lt;phyt> sees loss, in default
expects to have a third quarter, ended march 31, loss of about
200,000 dlrs and is in default on its bank loan because of the
resignation of chairman and chief executive officer.
the company said the loss followed four quarters of modest
profits. in the year ago quarter it earned 11,000 dlrs, or one
cent a share. for the first half of fiscal 1987, it reported a
profit of 42,000 dlrs, or two cts a share, compared to a year
earlier loss of 294,000 dlrs, or 17 cts a share.
it said president michael r. hall will assume the duties of
physio technology said the resignation of chairman james c.
lane can constitute non-compliance with its series a
convertible subordinated debentures due 1996 and a default
under its agreement with the merchants bank of kansas city.
it explained a declaration of non-compliance under the
debentures would create a a default under the loan agreements
requiring immediate payment of 1.8 mln dlrs of debentures and
about 450,000 dlrs outstanding under the bank credit line.
the company said the debenture holders intend to waive the
non-compliance, but reserve the right to withdraw the waiver at
the end of any 30 day period.
physio technology said it is changing its field sales force
to independent representatives and dealers from employees to
its statement did not indicate how many employees would be
the company said lane will become an independent dealter
for the company in certain midwestern states. he will continue
to serve as a director, it added.
washington federal savings &lt;wfsl> 2nd qtr net
shr one dlr vs 76 cts
shr 1.92 dlrs vs 1.43 dlrs
net 22.8 mln vs 16.8 mln
note: full name of bank is washington federal savings and
u.s. energy futures called unchanged to lower
traders expect u.s. energy futures will
open unchanged to slightly lower this morning with support near
crude futures are called unchanged to five cts weaker
tracking unchanged domestic crudes and north sea brent crude,
which traded at 18.01 dlrs a barrel today, about ten cts below
traders said the supply squeeze in 15-day forward april
product futures, which fell sharply yesterday, are due to
open unchanged to 0.25 cent lower, traders said.
traders expect some followthrough selling in products but
said gasoil futures in london will probably lend some support
since they are trading as expected. may gasoil futures were off
1.50 dlrs a tonne this morning while june was down 1.25 dlrs in
ponce federal bank f.s.b. &lt;pfbs> 1st qtr net
shr 63 cts vs 89 cts
note: net for both qtrs reflects gains on sales of
securities of 1,755,137, or 51 pct of net, in 1987; and
3,001,222, or 89 pct of net in 1986.
bundesbank sees no reason to change monetary course -
bundesbank sees no reason to change monetary course -
the bank of england said it has satisfied
its revised estimate of today's shortfall in the money market,
providing 261 mln stg assistance in afternoon operations.
the bank bought in band one, 60 mln stg bank bills at 9-7/8
pct and in band two 200 mln stg bank bills and one mln stg
treasury bills at 9-13/16 pct. this brings the total help so
far today to 364 mln stg, compared with its deficit estimate of
lebanese pound falls sharply against dollar
the lebanese pound fell sharply against
the u.s. dollar again today with dealers attributing the
the pound closed at 118.25/118.75 against the dollar
compared to yesterday's close of 115.60/115.80.
"political deadlock is reflected in the pound's position.
there was more demand and less on offer in the market," one
the pound, which was at 18 to the dollar in january, 1986,
has lost more than 30 pct of its international value over the
brown boveri und cie ag lifts 1986 dividend
dividend on 1986 business 12 marks per share vs seven
(company is a subsidiary of switzerland's bbc ag brown
london freight market features grain out of u.s.
reported out of the u.s. but none of the business involved the
significant voyages to the continent or japan, ship brokers
a steady 13.50 dlrs was paid from the u.s. gulf to morocco
and 23.25 dlrs was paid for 27,000 long tons from the gulf to
taiwan. a vessel carrying 13,500 long tons of bagged wheat
flour from the gulf to aqaba received a lump sum of 472,500
grain from the great lakes to algeria made 28 dlrs against
27.75 paid for similar fixing towards the end of march.
market talk suggested a federal commerce vessel had been
booked to move grain from the great lakes to morocco on comanav
account at about 22 dlrs and 15.50 had been paid for a cargo of
oilseeds from british columbia to japan, but no confirmation
on the continent, shippers agreed 19 dlrs for wheat from la
pallice to buenaventura and 10.75 dlrs for grain from ghent to
naples/venice range. elsewhere, maize from east london to japan
soviet charterers reappeared in the timecharter sector and
secured a 30,000 tonner from savona for a trans-atlantic round
trip at 4,450 dlrs daily and a 31,000 tonner from
antwerp-hamburg for a similar voyage at 4,250 dlrs daily.
traders and commission house representatives are guesstimating
today's hog slaughter at about 287,000 to 295,000 head versus
292,000 week ago and 322,000 a year ago.
cattle slaughter is guesstimated at about 124,000 to
128,000 head versus 129,000 week ago and 134,000 a year ago.
whirlpool corp 1st qtr shr 66 cts vs 67 cts
whirlpool corp 1st qtr shr 66 cts vs 67 cts
the following rainfall was recorded in
the 24 hours up to (1200) gmt today
parana state: cascavel nil, ponta grossa nil,campo mourao
rio grando do sul state: passo fundo nil, santa maria 7.0
millimetres, cruz alta 8.5 mm, sao luiz gonzaga 4.4 mm. reuter
bundesbank sees no change in monetary course
the bundesbank sees no current reason
to change monetary course, vice-president helmut schlesinger
told reuters in a telephone interview.
schlesinger was responding to questions following remarks
yesterday by bundesbank board member claus koehler and west
berlin state central bank president dieter hiss, which, dealers
said, revived some speculation that german interest rate cuts
may once again be under discussion.
schlesinger said he had no comment on the remarks of his
but he added that the last central bank council meeting on
april 2 had discussed the economic situation with a mood of
"subdued optimism," particularly influenced by the news brought
by several state central bank presidents.
"much is going better than the impression gained by the
public from the january figures, which have been in the
german january industrial output fell 3.0 pct after a
decline of 0.9 pct in december. new industry orders fell 1.9
pct after they had been unchanged in december.
bank economists said that the two together showed the
economy would either stagnate or contract in the first quarter
aside from the economic developments, schlesinger added, a
steady monetary course was important to hold the dollar/mark
rate around current levels as bundesbank president karl otto
poehl had said while attending the washington world bank/imf
asked, however, if the bundesbank could move to cut rates
on repurchase agreements at the setting of the next repurchase
tender, due next tuesday, schlesinger said, "since the central
bank council gives its opinion on this theme only every 14
responding to the question whether the bundesbank had moved
away from a policy of targetting monetary growth toward one of
targetting currency rates, schlesinger said he could have no
comment on the subject while negotiations were still in
the following rainfall was recorded in
the areas over the past 24 hours
parana state: umuarama nil, paranavai nil, londrina nil,
sao paulo state presidente prudente nil, votuporanga nil,
franca nil, catanduva nil, sao carlos nil, sao simao nil.
minas gerais state: guaxupe nil, tres pontas nil. reuter
e.f. hutton lbo inc said tender offer by pc acquisittion
e.f. hutton lbo inc said tender offer by pc acquisittion
world bank to support sri lanka if deficits cut
the world bank will support sri lanka's
development program provided the country reduces its budget and
current account deficits, the ministry of finance said.
it said bank president barber conable at a meeting with sri
lanka's finance minister ronnie de mel in washington also
emphasised the need for structural adjustment and reform to the
economy, battered by five years of separatist disturbances.
officials said sri lanka's budget deficit this year is
expected to surpass the projected 28.7 billion rupees while
defence spending, already up by two billion rupees from a
targetted 10 billion, is also likely grow.
the ministry said de mel asked the world bank to give sri
lanka 6.5 billion rupees balance of payments support.
e.f. hutton lbo inc says unit terminates merger agreement
e.f. hutton lbo inc says unit terminates merger agreement
gemina has no comment on ambrosiano report
holding company &lt;gemina spa> said it had
no comment on an italian press report today that it has
acquired a 12 pct stake in &lt;nuovo banco ambrosiano spa>.
italian daily la repubblica said that gemina paid 205
billion lire for the shareholding from several italian banks. a
gemina spokeswoman told reuters, "we have nothing to say about
a spokeswoman for milan-based ambrosiano said, "we have no
information at this time." in february, ambrosiano chairman
giovanni bazoli said foreign and domestic firms have expressed
interest in buying stakes in the bank.
dividend on 1986 business unchanged at 10 marks per
ordinary share. company also set dividend of 11 marks for new
preference shares, which were issued last year.
(note: company has said profit will match 1985 level,
despite provisions of 480 mln marks connected with alleged
currency fraud. group net profit in 1985 was 596 mln marks,
parent company net was 477 mln marks. company's full name is
whirlpool corp &lt;whr> 1st qtr net
shr 66 cts vs 67 cts
sales 961.0 mln vs 870.6 mln
u.s. said to view g-7 meeting as major success
the united states, which has long
sought japanese action to stimulate its economy, appears to be
satisfied tokyo's latest package is a major development and
allows leading industrial nations to reaffirm their agreement
monetary sources said they believed that u.s. treasury
secretary james baker considered tokyo's package, announced
yesterday, to be a major stimulation of the japanese economy.
but yesterday's statement by seven leading industrial
powers endorses the yen's rise from around 153 to the dollar,
the level at the february 22 paris accord, to about 145 today.
and the initial reaction of currency markets in the far
east demonstrates that financial markets are unconvinced that
currencies yet reflect economic fundamentals, even though the
countries appear to do so. the yen sank below 145 at one point
despite intervention by the bank of japan.
kiichi miyazawa, japan's finance minister, said the
movement since paris was consistent with currency trading
ranges the nations agreed to defend in the february talks.
"i would say that what has happened (to the yen) in the past
several weeks was not outside the range we agreed to in the
discussions in paris," miyazawa said yesterday.
the supplementary budget worth about 34.48 billion dlrs was
announced by the ruling liberal democratic party on the eve of
miyazawa's departure for washington, to attend yesterday's
in a strongly worded statement terming the japanese action
"extraordinary and urgent", the meeting reaffirmed the paris
accord by noting that current exchange rates are within ranges
broadly consistent with fundamentals, or economic reality.
the group of seven -- the united states, japan, west
germany, france, britain, italy and canada -- therefore
repeated their willingness to continue close cooperation to
the cooperation agreement has resulted in concerted central
bank intervention of 8 billion to 9 billion dlrs to halt the
dollar's fall. while relatively unsuccessful, the scale of
intervention between so many nations is unprecedented in recent
years. monetary sources also said they understood that
secretary baker considered the meeting to be extremely
successful in the light of the japanese announcement.
they also said there was a growing feeling among the
finance ministers and central bankers that cooperation over
medium-term policies has replaced the bickering over short-term
west germany, whose currency has not risen anything like
the yen since the paris agreement, appears from the face of
yesterday's statement to have won acceptance from other
countries that its exchange rate is acceptable.
bonn's finance minister gerhard stoltenberg argues that
major currency shifts needed to remedy the huge imbalance
between west germany and japan's trade surpluses and america's
trade deficit have already taken place.
no mention was made, however, of the u.s. commitment to cut
the budget deficit even though it is implied in the
european nations and japan believe deficit cuts are
essential to curbing the record u.s. trade shortfall that
reached nearly 170 billion dlrs last year.
a similar argument was made on capitol hill earlier this
week by federal reserve board chairman paul volcker. a further
sharp fall to redress trade imbalances would "clearly pose
substantial risks of renewed inflationary momentum and could
undermine confidence in future financial stability," he said.
volcker warned a further dollar fall might force the
politically independent fed to drive up interest rates.
monetary sources said that, privately, west germany
welcomed the rise in the yen against the dollar while its own
currency remained relatively stable against the u.s. unit.
bonn and other european nations worry that once the weak
dollar blunts tokyo's export drive to the united states, the
japanese monolith will concentrate on european markets.
the ministers, meanwhile, also continued talks on making
their policy coordination more binding and one, canadian
finance minister michael wilson, said good progress was made.
wilson said they will meet before the june economic summit
to prepare a report for the leaders of the seven nations.
the united states and france, backed by the international
monetary fund, want the seven to agree on ranges or "norms" for a
limited number of economic objectives such as growth,
inflation, monetary conditions, trade balances and current
sharp deviations from these guidelines would result in
consultations between the countries on whether corrective
but the inclusion of currencies as one of the objectives
has bonn and london worried, monetary sources say, because it
implies washington is moving in the direction of target zones.
the sources said the reagan administration unsuccessfully
sounded out its allies on a system of target zones to limit
currency fluctuations just before the february meeting.
the concept is a much more rigid one than the secret ranges
of the paris accord and would mark a sharp departure from the
relatively free currency markets of recent years.
bank of france leaves intervention rate unchanged
the bank of france said it left its
intervention rate unchanged at 7-3/4 pct when it injected funds
in the market against first category paper in today's money
money market dealers had earlier expressed mixed views on
the possibility of quarter point cut.
the rate was last adjusted on march 9, when it was cut to
7-3/4 pct from the eight pct rate set in january.
global economic slowdown raises new debt fears
the global economy is expected to
weaken this year, adding new worries to an already serious
for finance ministers and central bankers attending this
week's semi-annual meetings of the international monetary fund
and world bank, the new figures released by the imf add an
the fund estimated world output would only grow by 2.7 pct
this year, versus 2.9 pct last year, and 3.1 pct in 1985.
in the industrial countries, gross national product, a
measure of all goods and services, was expected to decline to
2.3 pct this year, compared with 2.4 pct in 1986, the imf said.
for the developing countries, the gross domestic product,
another measure of economic growth, was expected to fall to 3.0
pct from 3.5 pct last year.
the new figures are considered a major disappointment to
the poorest countries. they had hoped that new vitality in the
industrial countries brought on by a sharp decline in oil
prices would assist their economic recovery and help them cope
imf officials, discussing their outlook, said they believed
the industrial country economies would move up to an annual
growth rate of three pct by the end of the decade.
economic analysts and the imf have been saying for some
time that the ability to keep the debt crisis from turning into
an economic rout rests on sustained economic growth.
since the debtor countries must look to the wealthier
states for markets for their products as well as financial
assistance, economic weakness in the developed nations'
debtor countries, including the very poorest states, have
only a few avenues open to them for earning foreign exchange,
including the key one of exports.
the u.s. economy, which is in its fifth year of expansion,
has served as a mainstay for developing country exports, but it
too is seen as being rather feeble this year, growing by only
2.3 pct, according to the imf.
for this reason and because of a high trade deficit, the
united states has been pressuring japan and west germany to
ignite their economies but with little apparent success.
the imf study also examines the course of the dollar and
the curious lack of impact it has had on the u.s. trade
reagan administration officials have been saying that the
impact is now beginning to show up, although it has been much
the imf observed in its world economic outlook that "it has
to be recognized that exchange rate adjustments take time to
work through to payments flows -- probably at least three years
to get a resonably complete effect."
the report added, however, "the adjustments may take even
spanish employers worried by high interest rates
federation, jose maria cuevas, said employers were worried
about the government's monetary policies because high real
he told a news conference wage pacts signed so far this
year were not endangering the government's five pct inflation
target. the government's perceived need to control inflation by
keeping a tight rein on credit was unnecessary, he said.
high real interest rates were attracting an influx of
speculative foreign capital which was undercutting the
government's target for monetary growth, cuevas said.
spain's most closely-watched measure of money supply,
liquid assets in public hands, grew at an annualised rate of 17
pct in march, against 11.4 pct in december last year and a
target range of 6.5 to 9.5 pct for 1987.
to combat this, the bank of spain has raised its call money
rate 14 times so far this year, to 14.5 pct at present from
cuevas said employers were heeding the government's call to
hold wage increases to its five pct inflation target this year,
with increases from salary reviews awarded last year and new
wage pacts averaging 5.6 pct in the first quarter of 1987.
these agreements covered less than 40 pct of spanish
workers, cuevas said, with the rest still in wage negotiations.
he said spain's current wave of strikes mainly affected the
state sector, where the government is trying to impose its five
cuevas said employers were also worried about the trend in
spain's foreign trade balance. the trade deficit in the first
two months of 1987 totalled 233 billion pesetas, a 68 pct
increase over the corresponding period last year.
however, employers did not favour a devaluation of the
showboat inc said its board declared a
two-for-one stock split, payable to shareholders of record on
lead prices rise on finely balanced physicals
lead prices have risen this week against
a background of a finely balanced physical sector, traders
further gains are possible if the ussr steps up its buying
or if labour problems develop in north america, they added.
london metal exchange (lme) prices are unusually buoyant at
a time of year when seasonal demand is normally slackening and
this buoyancy is generally attributed by traders to the low
level of lme stocks and steady, if unspectacular, physical
demand in the northern hemisphere finding supplies curtailed.
the supply problems are not new but are beginning to be
felt by a market in which, as peak winter demand tails off,
stocks usually build fast and availability increases, traders
the lower supply levels result from a number of different
delayed shipments from peru to mediterranean countries
because of production and transport problems, lack of spanish
exports since the closure last year of cia la cruz's smelter at
linares and lower output in morocco and greece have all meant
additional demand being directed to merchants who in turn have
in addition broken hill associated smelters' port pirie,
south australia, smelter is halting production for five weeks
for maintenance. although the company said it would meet
commitments, this will put further pressure on stocks.
and the u.s. company doe run has kept its 140,000 tonnes
per year boss, montana smelter closed. this cut producer stocks
and contributed to a closer supply/demand balance within the
u.s. market, for many years depressed by surplus production and
a regular supplier to the world market.
mexican supplies, which have sometimes swelled lme stocks,
have been normal but are finding ready buyers, traders said.
on the demand side, winter battery manufacture has held up
quite well and some u.s. buying of lead sheet has been reported
in the u.k. soviet lead buying, notably absent in europe in the
first two months of the year, was resumed when a large buying
order was filled by merchants in march.
merchant demand has fuelled the rise in lme lead prices
this week and has seen cash metal move above 320 stg and
establish a premium of around 10 stg over three months
delivery. specific demand has been directed towards metal in
gothenburg and trieste warehouses. gothenburg material is often
a target for merchants shipping to the ussr, traders said.
on stocks, the popular lme continental warehouses, antwerp
and rotterdam, have little more than 3,000 tonnes of lead each,
and this is believed to be in strong hands.
out of a total 22,125 tonnes in lme stocks, the lowest
level since june 1980, just over half is in u.k. warehouses
which are not popular with merchants putting together
but even u.k. stocks have dropped around 6,000 tonnes since
the start of the year. traders said this is partly due to
secondary smelters buying ingots to supplement feed supplies
affected by environmental controls, which put restrictions on
labour negotiations in north america will play an important
part in determining the direction of prices, with contracts
expiring end-april at cominco's trail and kimberley, b.c.,
mine/smelter and at doe run's herculaneum, mo, smelter.
noranda's new brunswick mine/smelter also has a contract
expiry in july which may cause some nervousness in view of
strikes by its zinc and copper workers over recent months.
traders said lme three months delivery, already attracting
speculative buying, could rise to 320/330 stg on current
firmness, while nearby tightness could widen the cash premium
to 20 from four. three months was quoted at 313 stg at
rexham corp &lt;rxh> 1st qtr net
shr 70 cts vs 42 cts
sales 68.3 mln vs 53.5 mln
note: 1987 net includes pretax gain 400,000 dlrs from
1987 results include production graphics corp and systems
technology and weapons system test divisions of new technology
first eastern corp &lt;febc> 1st qtr net
shr 50 cts vs 47 cts
note: share adjusted for two-for-one stock split in january
fhlbb changes short-term discount note rates
the federal home loan bank board
adjusted the rates on its short-term discount notes as follows:
maturity   new rate  old rate  maturity
30-174 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct    30-87 days
175-190 days  5.85 pct  5.82 pct   88-103 days
191-270 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct  104-179 days
271-288 days  5.92 pct  5.85 pct  180-205 days
289-360 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct  206-360 days
anchor financial &lt;afcx> to make acquisition
has agreed to acquire waccamaw state bank of surfside beach,
s.c., in an exchange of 1.435 anchor shares for each waccamaw
share, subject to regulatory and shareholder approvals.
waccamaw had assets of 22.8 mln dlrs as of march 31.
stoltenberg not surprised by dollar reaction
stoltenberg said he was not surprised by the overnight decline
of the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
speaking briefly with reporters before entering a meeting
of the international monetary fund he said, "these minor
the dollar declined in the initial reaction to a statement
by the group of seven industrial countries reaffirming their
paris agreement in february to maintain their currencies around
asarco ups u.s. lead price 0.50 ct to 26.50 cts
asarco inc said it is increasing its
base spot sales price for refined lead by one-half cent to
26.50 cents a lb, fob, delivered in carload lots, effective
e.f. hutton &lt;efh> unit's purolator offer expires
e.f. hutton lbo inc said the tender
offer by its wholly owned unit, pc acquisition inc, for
purolator courier corp &lt;pcc> expired at 2400 edt yesterday
without the purchase of any purolator common stock.
hutton added that pc acquisition also terminated its merger
hutton said the offer, which had been conditioned upon the
tender of at least 5,116,892 purolator shares, or about
two-thirds of the outstanding shares, was terminated because
the minimum number of shares was not tendered.
purolator had entered into a definitive agreement with pc
acquisition, part-owned by e.f. hutton lbo inc, a unit of e.f.
hutton, and some officers of purolator's u.s. courier division,
in which pc offered to purchase 6,332,471 purolator common
stock shares for 35 dlrs a share.
following that move, pc acquisition planned to merge a
subsidiary into purolator, converting all outstanding purolator
common it did not own into an aggregate 46 mln dlrs principal
amount of 12 pct guaranteed debentures due 2002 and warrants to
purchase 15 pct of a purolator unit comprised of purolator's
hutton said as of 2400 edt yesterday about 181,000 shares
of purolator common stock, or about 2.4 pct of the outstanding
shares, had been validly tendered and not withdrawn.
pc acquisition has instructed its depository for the offer
to return promptly the purolator stock deposited by, or on
behalf of, tendering shareholders, hutton said.
abbott laboratories 1st qtr net shr 62 cts vs 52 cts
abbott laboratories 1st qtr net shr 62 cts vs 52 cts
india foodgrain target 160 mln tonnes in 1987/88
been fixed at 160 mln tonnes in 1987/88 (apr-mar), unchanged
from the 1986/87 target, the agriculture ministry said in its
actual output was estimated at 151 mln tonnes in 1986/87
due to failure of monsoon rains in 15 out of 35 meterological
the report gave the targets for various crops with
estimated harvested crops in 1986/87 in brackets as following,
in mln tonnes - rice 65 (60), wheat 49 (49), coarse grains
including sorghum and millets 32 (29) and pulses 14 (13).
despite failure of monsoon rains in recent years, it was
possible to maintain higher foodgrain production, signifying
growing resilience in agricultural sector, the report said.
the strategy for increasing irrigation potential along with
greater use of high yielding seed varieites and improvement in
fertiliser efficiency is yielding results, it said, adding
total foodgrain output in 1985/86, 1984/85 and 1983/84
respectively was 150.5 mln tonnes, 145.5 mln and a record 152.4
india has targeted to produce between 178 and 183 mln tonnes
of foodgrains by the last year of the seventh five-year
development plan ending march 31, 1990.
taking the midpoint of 180 mln tonnes as the target and the
1986/87 estimated production of around 151 mln tonnes, the gap
of 29 mln tonnes has to be made up during the remaining three
years of the plan by increasing grain output annually by more
than nine mln tonnes. but the target can be achieved only with
"the major thrust programme will, therefore, be better water
(irrigation) management. simultaneously, efforts for spread of
improved technology including timely use of inputs (farm
materials like fertilisers) in adequate quantities have to be
on the new york cotton exchange no 2 cotton futures contract as
of april 8 were reported at 34,661 bales, down 421 bales from
the previous day's figure. there were no bales awaiting review
reichhold chemical &lt;rci> sets anti-takeover plan
board adopted a warrant dividend plan in which one preferred
stock purchase right will be distributed as a dividend on each
the company said its warrant dividend plan is designed to
protect its shareholders against unsolicted, coercive attempts
to aquire control without making an adequate offer for all
reichhold said the adoption is not a response to any
reichhold said each right will entitle shareholders to buy
one one-hundreth of a share of a newly created series of
preferred stock at an initial exercise price of 120 dlrs, with
dividend and voting rights approximately equal to those of one
share of the company's common stock.
the rights will be exercisable only if, without reichhold's
prior consent, a person or group a acquires 20 pct or more of
the voting power or announces a tender offer which would result
in 20 pct ownership, the company said.
reichhold said it is entitled to redeem the rights at five
cts apiece before a 20 pct position has been acquired, or
before an existing 20 pct shareholder buys an additional two
pct or more of the voting power of the company, or in
the tax-free distribution will become effective may 1,
1987, and will expire 10 years later, the company said.
details of the plan are outlined in a letter to be mailed
abbott laboratories inc &lt;abt> 1st qtr net
shr 62 cts vs 52 cts
net 142.0 mln vs 123.0 mln
sales 1.00 billion vs 865.0 mln
hanson &lt;han> to buy int'l protein &lt;pro> stock
it has agreed to sell in a private placement 330,000 common
shares at 11.75 dlrs a share to a u.s. subsidiary of hanson
in addition, david clarke the president of another hanson
trust subsidiary, hanson industries, will be named chairman of
international proteins's executive committee upon his election
to the board at the annual meeting.
international proteins recently acquired clarke's family
business, great south beach sales co, for 900,000 restricted
common shares of which 350,000 have been issued to date.
international proteins said its agreement with hanson trust
is subject to stockholder approval at the annual meeting which
is expected to be held in june.
the company said hanson trust is purchasing the stock for
investment purposes, adding the agreement includes restrictions
on purchase or sale of the company by hanson for the next five
international proteins said it will use the proceeds to
the company has about 2.1 mln shares outstanding.
egypt buys pl 480 wheat flour - u.s. traders
egypt bought 125,723 tonnes of u.s.
wheat flour in its pl 480 tender yesterday, trade sources said.
the purchase included 51,880 tonnes for may shipment and
73,843 tonnes for june shipment. price details were not
spain has 35 mln dlr current surplus february
spain had a 35 mln dlr current account
surplus in february compared with a 68 mln dlr surplus in
january and a 355 mln dlr surplus in february last year, bank
spain's trade deficit narrowed to 581 mln dlrs compared
with 664 mln dlrs in january but the large increase in non-oil
imports contributed to the substantial increase over the 159
mln dlr deficit registered in february 1986.
exports at 2.58 billion dlrs were up 19 pct compared with
february last year, but imports were 46 pct higher than last
non-oil imports totalled 2.79 billion dlrs compared with
1.91 billion in february last year, reflecting the large
ammount of investment goods entering the country with the
recovery of the spanish economy, the bank of spain said.
spain's tourism earnings continued to grow and totalled 655
mln dlrs in february, compared with 103 mln dlrs in january and
502 mln dlrs in february last year.
india oilseed output forecast to rise
india's oilseed output is expected to
rise to 12.25 mln tonnes in 1986/87 ending october, up on 11.15
mln in 1985/86 but down from 12.95 mln harvested in 1984/85,
the agriculture ministry's 1986/87 report said.
but the forecast for 1986/87 is well below a target of 14.8
mln tonnes fixed for the year, it said, adding bad weather hit
the national oilseeds development program will invest 300
mln rupees in 1986/87 on supplying improved high-yielding seeds
and other support services to help boost production, it added.
india imports about 1.2 mln tonnes of edible oils a year.
exxon &lt;xon> south african unit acquired by zenex
&lt;zenex oil pty ltd> said it
acquired the interests of esso south africa, the local
subsidiary of exxon corp &lt;xon), and will use up to 20 mln rand
in profits to finance educational and social programs.
the profit scheme will begin after zenex has paid exxon an
undisclosed purchase price for esso, zenex chairman john
the acquisition follows the exxon withdrawal from south
sallie mae adjusts short-term discount note rates
association said its rates on short-term discount notes were as
maturity   new rate    old rate  maturity
5-14 days  5.80 pct    5.75 pct     5-14 days
15-360 days  5.00 pct    5.00 pct    15-85 days
freddie mac adjusts short-term discount rates
the federal home loan mortgage corp
adjusted the rates on its short-term discount notes as follows:
33 days   6.00 pct   6.00 pct  33 days
(centigrade) and rain (mm) in the 24 hours to 12.00 gmt were:
vw says 480 mln marks maximum for currency losses
&lt;vowg.f>, vw, linked to an alleged foreign currency fraud will
not exceed the 480 mln marks provision already made, a vw
the spokesman was commenting after vw had confirmed it
would pay an unchanged 10 mark dividend for ordinary shares on
one west german newspaper today quoted foreign currency
dealers in frankfurt as speculating that the total losses from
the currency affair could be as high as 1.5 billion marks, but
the vw spokesman described 480 mln marks as an "upper limit."
vw said in a statement following today's supervisory board
meeting that it had discussed the foreign currency scandal in
detail, and was setting up a new probe into its foreign
currency activities to be carried out by an unnamed auditing
vw has said computer programs were erased and documents
were faked in the alleged fraud in which it believes
transactions intended to protect it against possible foreign
vw's former foreign currency chief burkhard junger was
arrested on monday on suspicion of embezzlement and of having
earlier vw had said that its 1986 results would match 1985
profits. vw's group net profit in 1985 was 596 mln marks and
parent company net was 477 mln marks. it also said it recommend
an unchanged dividend to the supervisory board. the company has
also set a dividend of 11 marks for new preference shares,
which were issued last year. analysts have described the held
dividend as a move to reassure worried shareholders.
vw increased nominal capital by 300 marks last year to 1.5
billion marks, with the result that its total dividend payment
on 1986 will be 306 mln marks compared with 240 mln on 1985,
since the new capital was in preference shares.
the share analysts say vw will have to dig into reserves in
order to maintain the disclosed 1986 profit at 1985 levels. at
the end of 1985, vw had parent company reserves of slightly
yugoslavia to tender for 100,000 tonnes wheat
yugoslavia will tender april 14 for
100,000 tonnes of wheat, the u.s. agriculture department's
counselor in belgrade said in a field report.
the report, dated april 7, said the wheat must be from 1986
and 1987 harvest, and imports of soft wheat from europe and
from other suppliers will not be considered.
it said the imports will be used to rebuild the federal
reserves and as a result will not be subject to import
federated department stores march sales up 4.9 pct
federated department stores march sales up 4.9 pct
prices generally lower at nairobi coffee auction
prices were lower at this week's coffee
auction for all grades and qualities except better quality ab
grades, which held steady, the coffee board of kenya said.
the board said it offered 35,000 bags and sold 32,876.
so far this coffee year, kenya has sold 918,707 bags to all
markets, of which 326,182 are for the 1986/7 pool, with an
overall average price of 41,500 shillings a tonne, it added.
the board will offer 35,000 bags at its next auction on
total 35000 32876     average for sale      2014.93 (1994.94)
alex. brown &lt;absb> sets split, to offer shares
alex. brown inc said it has declared a
three-for-two stock split, payable may 29, record may 22.
the company also said it has filed to offer 912,000 common
shares, including 162,000 to be sold by a shareholder, with
company proceeds to be used for working capital and general
corporate purposes.  its alex. brown and sons inc subsidiary is
the offering is expected to be made before the record date
of the split, the company said.
highland superstores inc &lt;high> 4th qtr net
shr 38 cts vs 61 cts
revs 223.0 mln vs 200.3 mln
shr 1.11 dlrs vs 1.36 dlrs
revs 656.5 mln vs 520.5 mln
lvi group &lt;lvi> to make acquisition
lvi group inc said it has agreed in
principle to purchase all outstanding shares of &lt;spectrum
holding corp> for a proposed 13 mln dlrs in cash.
lvi said an additional 10 mln dlrs in common stock and
seven mln dlrs in notes will become payable if spectrum has
lvi, an interior construction firm, said the acquisition is
subject to execution of a definitive agreement and completion
lvi and spectrum, an asbestos abatement concern, expect to
close the deal in june, lvi said.
texas american &lt;tae> omits preferred payout
its board has decided to again omit the quarterly dividend on
its 2.575 dlr cumulative convertible exchangeable preferred
the dividend would have been payable may one.  the company
last paid 64.3 cts a share on the issue in august 1986.
vornado inc &lt;vno> 4th qtr jan 31 net
shr 1.64 dlrs vs 1.56 dlrs
revs 20.1 mln vs 19 mln
avg shrs 2.8 mln vs 3.4 mln
shr 5.06 dlrs vs 5.92 dlrs
net 16 mln vs 20.3 mln
revs 74.6 mln vs 68 mln
avg shrs 3.2 mln vs 3.4 mln
brenda mines selling kerr addison shares
&lt;brenda mines ltd> said it sold
2,830,390 &lt;kerr addison mines ltd> shares to a group of
underwriters led by wood gundy inc and brown, baldwin nisker
phoenix financial &lt;phfc> buys data access stake
chairman david cohen has sold 1,800,000 common shares to
phoenix financial corp for undisclosed terms and resigned as
the company said phoenix financial now has a 27 pct
interest in data access and effective control.
data access said phoenix chairman martin s. ackerman has
been named chairman of data access as well and two other
phoenix representatives have been named to the data access
board.  it said four directors other than cohen have resigned
health and rehabilitation &lt;hrp> initial payout
properties trust said it declared an intitial dividend of 55
cts per share for the period ending march 31, 1987
the dividend will be payed may 20 to shareholders of record
on april 20, the company said.
the company said it organized in late 1986 and closed its
intitial public offering of shares dec 23, 1986.
the initital dividend includes five cts attributable to the
period between dec 23 and 31, 1986, and 50 cts attributable to
the first qtr of 1987, ending march 31, 1987.
t. rowe price &lt;trow> sees higher first quarter
t. rowe price associates said its
first quarter earnings rose about 50 pct from the year-ago
2,634,000 dlrs and revenues about 30 pct from the year-ago 24.2
it said it expects "very good" earnings and revenue growth
this year.  in 1986 it earned 14.8 mln dlrs on revenues of
general partners cuts stake in gencorp &lt;gy>
and exchange commission it has reduced its stake in gencorp inc
to 8.6 pct, from 9.8 pct, by selling 250,000 shares at a price
equal to 118.5 dlrs per share.
general partners, which includes gc holdings inc and
general acquisitions inc, said yesterday it was dropping its
100-dlr-a-share hostile takeover bid for gencorp because of
gencorp's move to buy back its shares for up to 130 dlrs each.
heritage financial services &lt;hers> 1st qtr net
shr 45 cts vs 43 cts
note: company had its initial public offering of 1,200,000
national computer &lt;nlcs> sees earnings growth
expects fiscal year earnings to improve by about 20 pct, the
company told analysts, although it said the april 30 first
quarter should show "down earnings and virtually flat
chairman charles oswald said national computer has taken
steps to improve margins. he said revenues are expected to
increase modestly because of the company's decision to downsize
its leasing business, nonrecurring revenueslast year from a
one-time texas teacher assessment project and the impact of the
oswald said national computer's first quarter results will
be down as a result of a major financial systems sales last
year, a higher effective tax rate and the increased number of
the company said the next three consecutive quarters should
u.k. chancellor lawson says there may be need to cut
u.k. chancellor lawson says there may be need to cut
rexham &lt;rxh> repurchases stake from nortek &lt;ntk>
repurchased 381,050 of its shares or 9.1 pct from nortek inc
for 42 dlrs each, and nortek has withdrawn its proposal to
acquire rexham for 43 dlrs per share.
rexham said nortek has also agreed not to buy rexham shares
or take other actions under a 10-year standstill agreement.
the rexham board had rejected the nortek bid as inadequate.
the company also said its board has authorized the
repurchase in the open market or privately from time to time of
up to an additional five pct of its own shares and the
establishment of an employee stock ownership plan.  the plan is
expected to purchase from rexham a new convertible preferred
stock with 11.5 pct of rexham's voting power with proceeds of a
exxon &lt;xon> cuts heating oil price, traders said
oil traders in the new york area said
exxon corp's exxon u.s.a. unit reduced the price it charges
contract barge customers for heating oil in new york harbor
0.50 cent a gallon, effective today.
they said the reduction brings exxon's contract barge price
to 49.75. the price decrease follows sharp declines in heating
oil prices in the spot and futures markets, traders said.
fhlbb changes short-term discount note rates
the federal home loan bank board
adjusted the rates on its short-term discount notes as follows:
maturity   new rate  old rate  maturity
30-174 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct   30-174 days
175-190 days  5.88 pct  5.85 pct  175-190 days
191-270 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct  191-270 days
271-288 days  5.92 pct  5.92 pct  271-288 days
289-360 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct  289-360 days
&lt;strathfield oil and gas ltd> year net
shr 46 cts vs 48 cts
fed may add reserves to banking system
the federal reserve may intervene in
the government securities market to supply temporary reserves
indirectly via customer repurchase agreements, economists said.
they said that while the fed faces no great urgency to add
reserves at the start of the two-week maintenance period today
it would probably do so in order to offset a relatively high
fed funds opened at 6-3/16 pct and remained there in early
trading. yesterday, they averaged 6.45 pct, after rising as
high as seven pct at the close.
diamond crystal &lt;dslt> might sell salt unit
diamond crystal salt co said it
the company said it retained first boston corp to assist it
with the possible sale of the division, "assuming a fair price
and reasonable terms can be obtained."
diamond crystal said sale of the unit was in the best
the company also said it incorporated its packet products
division as of april one. the unit will be an indirect wholly
owned subsidiary called diamond crystal specialty foods inc.
current management of the division will remain.
lawson says some countries could cut rates
the exchequer, said some countries may need to cut interest
rates with the aim of maintaining exchange rate stability.
speaking to journalists one day after the group of seven
countries reaffirmed goals set in paris six weeks ago, he said
central banks would continue to intervene "as and when
he said the g-7 countries were concerned that japan do more
to stimulate domestic demand and welcomed measures outlined by
japanese finance minister kiichi miyazawa yesterday.
lawson said he was still worried about  the risk of a
simultaneous recession in the united states, japan and west
germany, though less so than when he gave his march 17 budget
"if anything i'm a little bit less concerned, but there is
asked if the united states should consider increasing
interest rates to support the dollar, he said, "if there is a
need for changes in relative interest rates, it doesn't need to
be a rise in interest rates in the united states."
lawson said there was some concern expressed in yesterday's
meetings at the slow progress the united states had made in
"we believe there will be some worthwhile progress in
reducing the deficit this year. the important thing is that it
continue year after year," lawson said.
the february 22 louvre accord called for efforts to
stabilize currencies at then-current exchange rates. in the six
weeks that followed the japanese yen continued to rise against
the dollar despite massive central bank intervention.
asked whether this intervention was a sign of weakness in
the louvre accord, he said, "i don't think so. if there had been
no intervention you would have called that a sign of weakness."
although intervention could be a cause of inflation, lawson
said, "the world does not appear to be in an inflationary mode
... but one has to be vigilant."
he said yesterday's g-7 statement, which affirmed that
"current levels" of exchange rates were appropriate, had been
"carefully worded." "we know what we mean, and we all mean the
lawson said financial markets seem to believe that japanese
measures outlined in the louvre accord were the source of
therefore, the g-7 countries welcomed miyazawa's
presentation of plans for a supplemental budget to stimulate
they particularly welcomed the goal of an immediate
increase in public works spending, but lawson said the package
also involved a second stage to increase expenditures during
the second half of this year.
french free market cereal export bids detailed
to export 320,000 tonnes of free market barley, 225,000 tonnes
of maize, 25,000 tonnes of free market bread-making wheat and
20,000 tonnes of feed wheat at today's ec tender, trade sources
for the barley, rebates of between 138 and 141.25 european
currency units (ecus) per tonne were sought, for maize they
were between 129.65 and 139 ecus, for bread-making wheat around
145 ecus and for feed wheat around 142.45 ecus.
barley rebates of up to 138.50 ecus were requested for a
total of 40,000 tonnes and at 139 ecus for 85,000 tonnes.
rebates of up to 130 ecus per tonne were requested for a
total of 55,000 tonnes maize and up to 131 ecus for 105,000
u.k. potato futures trading not to be suspended
trading on the london potato futures
market will not be suspended, richard harris, chairman of the
london potato futures association (lpfa), said in a statement
it was in response to strong representations by the potato
marketing board (pmb) complaining of a gross distortion of
price which they say will result in large deliveries into the
physical market when the april futures position expires.
the pmb had sought an immediate suspension in futures
trading and asked the lpfa to take action to restore the
farmers and merchants have alleged a squeeze and cornering
of the market but harris pointed out that recent investigations
by the association of futures brokers and dealers (afbd), the
international commodities clearing house (icch) and other
parties, found no evidence to substantiate this.
the main complaint from some sections of the physical
market is what they say is an unrealistic futures premium over
the pmb's average ex-farm price. april futures traded this
morning between 168 and 170 stg per tonne compared with pmb's
bill englebright, joint secretary of the lpfa said there is
a two-tier market for physical potatoes. he said quality
potatoes are in short supply and prepackers have been paying
between 145 and 165 stg per tonne for best samples. but lesser
quality grades have traded below 100 stg.
some merchants fear that a large tonnage will be delivered
against the april futures contract between now and the end of
the month, and possibly disrupt the physical market.
harris said the lpfa rule book allows the management
committee to take steps as necessary to correct any malpractice
and he assured the committee is monitoring the situation.
group of 10 welcomes latest g-7 agreement
the group of 10 developed nations
issued a communique welcoming the reaffirmation of the paris
accord on currency stability by the group of seven leading
in the communique issued this morning, the g-10 said
"prospects of member countries' economies would be improved by
stability in the exchange rates of their currencies."
the g-10 includes the group of seven - the united states,
canada, britain, japan, italy, west germany and france - plus
belgium, the netherlands, sweden and also switzerland.
sources who attended the g-10 conference this morning said
the reference to the latest g-7 agreement was especially added
to the brief communique because currency stability will benefit
the g-10 met briefly before the international monetary fund
interim committee meeting scheduled for today.
canam manac wins 8.5 mln dlr contract
(the canam manac group inc) said its
canam steel works unit received a contract valued at 8.5 mln
dlrs to supply steel trusses to (canron inc) for a new car
canam manac said it will produce the trusses at its quebec
and ontario plants and delivery will be completed by august.
spot tin easier on european free market
spot tin on the european free market was
indicated in the easier range 4,200 to 4,230 stg per tonne, for
high grade metal in warehouse rotterdam, down 20 stg from
stability in sterling versus the dollar continued to apply
pressure to a market which is coming close to testing a
psychological chart support base at 4,200 stg, traders said.
dealers said major consumers still need to cover their may
and june requirements but are holding out for even lower
offers. reported high grade tin business in london was confined
to end april metal at 4,225 stg.
small-scale spot business was reported by west german
operators at 12.60 and 12.63 marks per kilo although the market
was still being undercut by chinese material, which traded at
one stage down to 12.54 marks per kilo, traders said.
dollar ends lower in lacklustre frankfurt
the dollar drifted down to end one
pfennig lower after a lacklustre session, held in limits by the
lack of concrete news from the group of seven meeting and
comments on the edge of the washington imf/world bank meeting.
dealers said the communique early in the european morning
from the g-7 meeting contained no significant new factors and
although the dollar dipped it generally resisted further
attempts to push it lower through the day.
the u.s. currency ended at 1.8270/80 marks, below
koch said the assessment of the dollar's direction was
based on a global view, with operators paying most attention to
comments by finance officials to see how closely they stated
adherence to international agreements such as those set at the
plaza hotel in 1985 and in paris on february 22.
koch described the wording of the communique from the g-7
bundebank vice-president helmut schlesinger told reuters in
a telephone interview that the german central bank sees no
current reason to change monetary course at present.
schlesinger was responding to questions following remarks
yesterday by bundesbank board member claus koehler and west
berlin state central bank president dieter hiss, which dealers
said revived some speculation that german interest rate cuts
german call money was slightly softer today, at around 3.70
some dealers said rates on new liquidity injections added
via bundesbank securities repurchase agreements may be cut next
week. hopes of a cut were dashed on tuesday with an allocation
but speaking of the pact tender rate next week, schlesinger
said, "since the central bank council gives its opinion on this
theme only every 14 days, this is hardly probable."
euromark rates scarcely responded to the central bankers
comments, with six months funds ending unaltered at around
3-7/8 pct. eurodollars for the same maturity rose a fractional
1/16 pct from yesterday to around 6-11/16 pct.
sterling dipped to end at 2.952/956 marks after 2.960/965
last night. the swiss franc firmed slightly to 120.30/45 marks
per 100 from 120.25/40, with the yen soaring however to
1.2570/90 marks per 100 from 1.2515/35 yesterday.
ems currencies saw the french franc end unchanged from last
night at 30.03/06 marks per 100, with the belgian franc easing
however to 4.829/831 marks per 100 from 4.831/833.
consolidated papers inc &lt;cper> 1st qtr net
shr 1.01 dlrs vs 1.08 dlrs
sales 174.9 mln vs 161.7 mln
humana &lt;hum> to sell medical offices
humana inc said it has agreed in
principle to sell 68 medfirst primary medical care facilities
to &lt;primedical corp> for undisclosed terms, with transfers
taking place over the next four months.
it said it retains 37 medfirst offices, mostly in the
the transaction is not expected to have any impact on
met-coil systems corp&lt;mets> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
shr seven cts vs nine cts
sales 15.3 mln vs 10.9 mln
shr 10 cts vs 38 cts
sales 35.8 mln vs 32.5 mln
qtly div three cts vs three cts prior
ford raises qtly payout 10 cts/shr to 75 cts
ford raises qtly payout 10 cts/shr to 75 cts
lawson sees no change in u.k. monetary policy
nigel lawson said he saw no immediate implications for british
monetary policy arising from the group of seven meeting
"exchange rate stability is in the u.k.'s interest," he told
asked what it meant for u.k. monetary policy, he said, "no,
i do not think there are any immediate implications."
ford motor co &lt;f> raises qtly payout
qtly div 75 cts vs 65 cts prior
steel stocks, which have had a healthy
runup recently, still present some short term investment
opportunities, according to some steel analysts.
but others say the upturn, based on strong orders and firm
prices this spring, has been strictly seasonal and will end
"it's that time of year. this is strictly seasonal," said
charles bradford of merrill lynch and co. "orders will be
strong for about two months, and there are signs that some
(order rates) are starting to dive already."
but dean witter reynolds inc analyst clarence morrison sees
some short-term potential in the group, which includes usx corp
&lt;x>, bethlehem steel corp &lt;bs>, armco inc &lt;as> and inland steel
"there is still some attractiveness to steels over the
short- to intermediate-term based on improved order rates and
rising prices," morrison said. he only recommends one stock,
however, inland, which is modernizing steelmaking operations to
despite his bearishness, merrill's bradford continues to
recommend armco, which he sees as a major turnaround.
armco's steelmaking operations are profitable, the balance
sheet has been improved, and its oilfield equipment business
has been slimmed and put in a joint venture with usx, bradford
noted. "it's not a high-quality investment situation yet but
they've come a long way," he said.
"we think the stock will do moderately better than the
market," he said. armco shares, trading off 1/4 at 10 today,
could go to 12, and possibly as high as 15, he said.
bradford sees armco earning 50 to 75 cts a share in 1987,
before special gains from recouped investment tax credits,
armco's 1988 earnings could be significantly higher, he
bradford is recommending sale of usx shares. "we had a buy
on it below 20 but when it gets to 28, let somebody else have
the steel and energy concern will earn about one dlr a
share in 1987, about half of that coming from asset sales, and
from two dlrs to 2.50 dlrs in 1988, bradford said. "but a lot
depends on oil prices," he added. about 60 pct of usx's sales
come from oil and natural gas.
other analysts, including michelle galanter applebaum of
salomon brothers inc, recommend usx. "the company's done a lot
(of restructuring), more than the market's given them credit
she sees the stock going to the mid 30s or higher. usx was
trading up 1/8 at 28-1/2. she predicts usx will earn 18 cts a
share this year and 2.73 dlrs next year against large losses in
applebaum, who is also positive on armco and inland, has
been recommending the stocks since last november.
peter marcus of painewebber inc is neutral on the group
although he said the earnings outlook is improved through the
but he sees potential trouble beyond then. "i think (steel)
prices on a bookings basis will start to drop by the summer,"
applebaum of salomon brothers also sees some seasonal
dropoff later in the year. "but there are more positives than
negatives," she said, citing reduced capacity in the domestic
industry, better prices, and a weaker dollar, which should
cause steel imports to drop off slightly from last year.
dekalb corp &lt;dklbb> 2nd qtr feb 28 net
shr 20 cts vs 14 cts
net 2.4 mln vs 1.7 mln
revs 136.7 mln vs 174.4 mln
sdhr 72 cts vs 82 cts
net 8.6 mln vs 9.9 mln
revs 212.5 mln vs 268.8 mln
abbott &lt;abt> sees gains from weaker dollar
its 1987 first quarter record results reflected continued
productivity improvement, higher volume, better product mix and
abbott reported 1987 first quarter earnings rose to a
record 142 mln dlrs or 62 cts a share on record sales of one
research and development expenses, most of which was
applied to diagnostic and pharmaceutical products, increased by
23 pct to 78 mln dlrs, it said.
sales of pharmaceutical and nutritional products were 548
mln dlrs in the first quarter, up 17.6 pct over a year ago,
abbott said. hospital and laboratory product sales in the first
quarter rose 14.1 pct to 456 mln dlrs, it said.
first quarter sales in domestic markets advanced 11.5 pct
to 688 mln dlrs while international sales jumped 27.1 pct to
eastern distributive beef trade weekly - usda
supplies of most beef cuts, however, limited interest noted for
tenderloins/flank steaks. yield grade 2-3 beef cuts, fabricated
160 round, part bnls     50-85  few 137
161 round, bnls          42-80  few 147
161 diamond cut          49-85  few 149
167a knuckle, peeled      8-15  few 163
168 top inside round     14-26  165-175
170 bottom gooseneck rnd 18-33  131-135
brazil cotton crop lower -- usda report
has been reduced to 710,000 from 735,000 tonnes (lint basis),
the u.s. agriculture department's officer in sao paulo said in
the report, dated april 7, said the reduction is based on
an expected smaller harvest in the center-south region.
the center-south crop is now estimated at 550,000 tonnes --
25,000 tonnes below the previous estimate.
hot, dry weather during part of january and excessive rains
in some areas in february reduced yield prospects and may have
nearly 60 pct of the crop has been harvested in parana and
slightly less in sao paulo, it said. cotton entering gins is of
fairly good quality, according to trade sources, it said.
treasury's baker says trade, current account imbalances "simply not sustainable"
treasury's baker says trade, current account imbalances "simply not sustainable"
ec authorises export 55,000 tonnes maize,  maximum rebate 130 ecus/tonne - trade sources.
ec authorises export 55,000 tonnes maize,  maximum rebate 130 ecus/tonne - trade sources.
ec authorises export 65,000 tonnes barley,  maximum rebate 138.75 ecus - brussels trade
ec authorises export 65,000 tonnes barley,  maximum rebate 138.75 ecus - brussels trade
rjr nabisco first quarter net to include 208 mln dlr gain, 209 mln dlr charge
rjr nabisco first quarter net to include 208 mln dlr gain, 209 mln dlr charge
brazil cocoa exporters unlikely to limit sales
likely to follow the example of cocoa producers alliance, cpa,
members, who may limit sales of the product in an effort to
boost world prices, trade sources said.
they said a similar procedure was taken in the past in
brazil and that it did not work out according to plans.
"the cocoa market is completely free. unlike coffee, which
is controlled through export registrations, cocoa exporters in
brazil operate at their own free will," a trade source said.
the traders were responding to questions whether they would
follow the example of cpa members meeting in yaounde.
the sources said the banco do brasil's foreign trade
department, cacex, never interferes in the cocoa market by
rejecting sales that do not meet certain price or shipment
"the position of local producers is always to negotiate as
they please. if they buy for ten and sell for eleven and think
it's a good deal, they are free to go ahead," one source added.
properties trust said its board declared an initial dividend of
55 cts, including 50 cts for the first quarter just ended and
five cts from its initial operating period that began december
the dividend is payable may 30, record april 20.
u.s. treasury's baker says rate shifts orderly
that changes in exchange rates have generally been orderly and
have improved the prospects for a reduction in external
in remarks before the imf's policy-making interim
committee, baker reiterated a group of seven statement last
night that the substantial exchange rate changes since the
plaza agreement 18 months ago have "now brought currencies
within ranges broadly consistent with economic fundamentals."
baker said, "these exchange rate shifts have generally been
orderly, and have improved prospects for the reduction of
external imbalances to more sustainable levels."
as they are today, the trade and current account imbalances
"simply are not sustainable," baker told the ministers.
he said that the reagan administration was resisting "strong
domestic pressure" for trade protection and was working closely
with the u.s. congress in crafting a trade bill.
"while we cannot yet be sure of the outcome, we are doing
what we can to ensure that the bill is not protectionist," he
baker also urged the international monetary fund's
executive board to review possible modifications to the fund's
compensatory financing facility before the annual meeting this
"we should pay particular attention to the lack of
continuing conditionality associated with the use of the cff
and to whether shortfalls in export earnings are indeed
time &lt;tl> to sell part of unit
time inc said its time-life video inc
subsidiary has agreed in principle to sell its institutional
training business to time-life video president william v.
it said the business will operate as ambrose video
sprinkel says tax hike would not reduce deficit
beryl sprinkel said the reagan administration remains strongly
opposed to a tax increase, including 18 billion dlrs of new
revenues in the budget plan by congressional democrats.
"we believe that significant increases in taxes would not
reduce deficits and could have adverse effects on growth,"
sprinkel told the house rules committee.
he said the administration wanted to continue its policy of
gradually reducing deficits through restraining government
spending and promoting economic growth. sprinkel said cutting
the budget deficit was the best way to lower the trade deficit.
royal business group inc &lt;roy> 2nd qtr march one
shr 49 cts vs five cts
shr diluted 45 cts vs five cts
shr 57 cts vs one ct
shr diluted 53 cts vs one ct
note: current year net both periods includes gain 873,000
results exclude business forms division, which is to be
&lt;mse cable systems inc> 4th qtr net
note: share adjusted for one-for-11 reverse split.
rule industries inc &lt;rule> 2nd qtr feb 28 net
shr 17 cts vs 10 cts
shr 27 cts vs 15 cts
revs 17.2 mln vs 12.5 mln
new jersey investor buys 5.2 pct of kinark &lt;kin>
falkenstein, told the securities and exchange commission he
holds 5.2 pct of the shares of kinark corp.
he said he has no plans to change the company and that he
bought the shares because he believed the stock was undervalued
and would rise in the next six months.
national distillers &lt;dr> sees second qtr gain
expects to realize a second quarter after-tax gain of four dlrs
per share from the 545 mln dlr sale of its spirits business to
national distillers' stock rose 1-1/8 to 65-1/2, after an
opening delay on the new york stock exchange for an imbalance
"i think the sales price was higher than most people
expected," said john henry of e.f. hutton group.
a company spokeswoman said the four dlr per share gain will
be included in second quarter net, which compares with 31 cts
per share last year, including the spirits and wine business
"they netted over 700 mln dlrs for spirits and wine. that
will ease their interest cost burden," said henry.
national distillers sold its wine business last month to
grand metropolitan plc's heublein inc for 128 mln dlrs.
henry said he had anticipated national distillers would net
only 600 mln dlrs at the most from the sale of the two liquor
henry said the company recovered from the sales the cost of
buying enron chemicals in the fourth quarter last year.
national distillers paid 570 mln dlrs cash for enron and
assumed 34 mln dlrs in debt. national distillers said at the
time it bought enron it would sell the spirits and wine
businesses, moving more into the chemical area.
for 1986, two thirds of income were from chemicals and
propane. national distillers earned, excluding the liquor
businesses, 2.21 dlrs per share for 1986. income from
discontinued operations, including the liquor businesses, was
weather hurts italian oranges - usda report
the second week of march caused damage to oranges in the
calabria region in southern italy, the u.s. agriculture
department's officer in rome said in a field report.
the report, dated april 3, said the region accounts for
about 22,000 hectares of the italian orange crop or about 26
however, orange production in the region for marketing year
1986/87 is forecast at 565,000 tonnes or 25 pct of the total
the report said trade contacts agree that about 15 pct of
the orange output in calabria was damaged by frost.
ec grants free market barley, maize exports
export of 65,000 tonnes of free market barley at today's tender
at a maximum rebate of 138.75 european currency units and
55,000 tonnes of french maize at 130 ecus, grain traders here
it rejected bids for breadmaking and feed wheat, they said.
fed buying dollars for yen in open market, new york dealers say
fed buying dollars for yen in open market, new york dealers say
waste recovery inc &lt;wrii> 4th qtr net
shr loss eight cts vs loss nine cts
net loss 311,255 vs loss 157,941
shr loss 27 cts vs loss 24 cts
net loss 858,624 vs loss 399,385
branch corp &lt;bnch> 1st qtr net
shr primary 99ct vs 82 cxts
shr diluted 93 cts vs 78 cts
assets 3.25 billion vs 2.74 billion
deposits 2.58 billion vs 2.24 billion
loans 2.20 billion vs 1.81 billion
kurz-kasch ups stake in component tech &lt;ctec>
molding maker, told the securities and exchange commission it
had increased its holdings in component technology corp by two
it said it bought the 39,000 shares of stock at 5.30-6.875
dlrs a share for investment purposes.
brazil soybean yields seen average - usda report
based on field travel in the
brazilian state of parana, soybean yields should be about
average or 2.0 to 2.2 tonnes per hectare, the u.s. agriculture
department's officer in sao paulo said in a field report.
the report, dated march 24, noted parana accounts for about
20 to 24 pct of brazil's total soybean crop.
it said generally favorable weather from early december
through february helped compensate for earlier dryness.
however, hot, dry weather during the past 20 to 30 days
followed by an unseasonably brief cold spell during the second
week of march has raised concern about late planted soybeans
which are still immature, but the impact may be localized, the
the corn crop is expected to be a record and will create
serious storage problems, the report said.
due to favorable support prices, corn area increased by
more than 25 pct at the expense of soybeans, and yields are
expected to be above average, it said.
due to late plantings only about 20 pct of the corn crop
during the field trip long truck lines were noted at grain
elevators where preference is given to soybeans over corn, the
new crop wheat plantings are expected to decline  -- parana
accounts for about 60 pct of total production. major reasons
for the decline are expected reduced government support price
qtly div 10 cts vs eight cts prior
fed seen buying dollars for yen in open market
the federal reserve was detected buying
dollars for yen in the open market as the dollar fell to a
40-year low of 144.60 yen in nervous late morning trading,
they said the size of the intervention was relatively
modest so far but it was a clear indication that the u.s.
remained committed to the late february paris currency
stabilization accord, which was reaffirmed in washington last
a fed spokeswoman had no comment on the dealer reports.
the dollar hovered around 144.70 just before midday.
rjr nabisco &lt;rjr> has offsetting gains, charges
1987 first quarter results will include an after-tax gain of
208 mln dlrs from the sale of heublein inc and offsetting
the company said its operations are performing well and in
rjr nabisco said the charges reflect reserves it
rjr nabisco said the expenses covered, on after-tax basis,
-- 50 mln dlrs for the write-down of redundant equipment
and facilities resulting from modernization of its u.s. tobacco
-- 79 mln dlrs for continuing restruction of its food
-- 80 mln dlrs in connection with the early retirement of
baybanks inc &lt;bbnk> 1st qtr net
oper shr 1.08 dlrs vs 96 cts
oper shr diluted 1.02 dlrs vs 89 cts
oper net 16.1 mln vs 12.8 mln
avg shrs 14.9 mln vs 13.4 mln
avg shrs 16.1 mln vs 14.8 mln
note: 1987 net excludes gain 4,820,000 dlrs from cumulative
effect of change in calculating depreciation expense.
france's balladur says target zone notion nearer
balladur said that the financial community is closer to
arriving at a system of target zones for currencies despite the
fact that little is being said about them.
speaking with reporters at the semiannual meetings of the
international monetary fund, balladur said, "we are not very far
from the notion of target zones, even if we don't say so."
he told reporters that "our ideas are progressing," adding
that the finance ministers have been talking about more
cooperation on economic policies and on levels around which
student loan marketing association &lt;slm> 1st qtr
shr 95 cts vs 71 cts
net 42.4 mln vs 34.5 mln
assets 18.61 billion vs 15.66 billion
fire at tate/lyle london jetty halts unloading
no raw sugar is being unloaded at tate
and lyles refinery at silvertown on the river thames following
a fire yesterday afternoon, tate and lyle plc said.
the fire destroyed a large sector of the main conveyor from
the raw sugar jetty to the weighhouse.
the company said it is not yet known how long the jetty
will be out of use but it hoped that by tomorrow unloading of
the bulk carrier mykon wave will be able to continue using
temporary arrangements, tate and lyle said.
the mykon wave arrived in the port recently with about
18,300 tonnes of bulk sugar from maputo in swaziland. about
1,600 tonnes remain to be discharged.
five other ships loaded with raw sugar are awaiting at
silvertown to be discharged, tate and lyle added.
announcement by clevite industries inc &lt;clev> that jp
industries has submitted a proposal to clevite for the
acquisition of the company at 13.50 dlrs per share in cash.
john psarouthakis, chairman and president of jp industries,
said that the company hopes to promptly negotiate an agreement
with the special committee of clevite's board.
in february, jp industries said it purchased clevite's
jp industries said it is not aware of any other reason for
qtly div 43 cts vs 38 cts prior
monsanto &lt;mtc> unit sees operating loss in 1987
monsanto corp's g.d. searle and co unit
said it will report an operating loss for 1987, mainly due to
searle chairman sheldon gilgore said searle's operating
loss in 1987 will be less than the 87 mln dlr operating loss in
he said searle's first quarter sales will be up 21.8 pct to
179 mln dlrs from 147 mln dlrs in the year ago quarter. in 1986
searle's sales were 665 mln dlrs.
gilgore said the company intends to have sales of three
he said the company anticipates approval in japan, the
u.s., italy, spain and the u.k. for its ulcer treatment drug
he also said that in a paper not yet published the drug was
shown to prevent a flare-up of ulcers for a longer period of
time than tagamet, made by smithkline beckman corp &lt;skb>.
other drugs in searle's pipeline include tissue plasminogen
activator (tpa), made by a different process than genentech's
&lt;gene> tpa, expected to be approved for marketing this year.
status game corp &lt;stgm> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
oper shr six cts vs one ct
oper shr 11 cts vs five cts
note: share adjusted for 10 pct stock dividend in december
1986. prior year net excludes tax credits of 5,775 dlrs in
quarter and 17,325 dlrs in nine mths.
net excludes discontinued amusement game operations gains
144,095 dlrs vs 70,194 dlrs in quarter and loss 2,952,814 dlrs
vs gain 196,872 dlrs in nine mths.
universal foods corp &lt;ufc> votes dividend
qtly div 20 cts vs 20 cts prior qtr
betz laboratories inc &lt;betz> sets quarterly
qtly div 35 cts vs 35 cts prior
northwestern national life &lt;nwnl> ups payout
qtly div 24 cts vs 21-1/2 cts prior
note: northwestern national life insurance co.
grain ships waiting at new orleans
ten grain ships were loading and 14
were waiting to load at new orleans elevators, trade sources
mississippi river, myrtle grove 1      0
peavey co, st elmo           1      0
cargill grain, terre haute   2      1
cargill grain, port allen    0      0
foothill &lt;fgi>, sierrita in standstill accord
foothill group inc said it reached a
standstill agreement with santa cruz resources inc and its
parent, sierrita resources inc, that bars the companies from
acquiring more than a 30 pct interest in foothill, except
through a business combination approved by foothill's board.
the company also said santa cruz has advised it that it
owns 24.7 pct of foothill's outstanding common stock.
in addition, santa cruz and sierrita have agreed to vote
their shares in accordance with instructions from the foothill
board in connection with certain business combinations and
foothill said the arrangement also bars santa cruz and
sierrita fron tendering any foothill securities owned by them
into any tender offer unless certain unspecified conditions are
first federal of michigan &lt;ffom> 1st qtr net
shr 3.33 dlrs vs 3.39 dlrs
avg shrs 10.95 mln vs 10.05 mln
signed letter of intent to acquire community bank and trust of
hartselle, ala., with assets of 26 mln dlrs, for undisclosed
terms, subject to approval by regulatory authorities and
completion is expected within the next year, it said.
fab industries inc &lt;fit> 1st qtr feb 28 net
shr 69 cts vs 67 cts
revs 27.6 mln vs 26.5 mln
ec commission authorised to buy maize in june
to buy up to one mln tonnes of maize into intervention stores
in the second half of june, although sales into intervention
normally end on april 30, commission sources said.
they said approval was given by the ec's cereals management
committee because of the possible disturbance of the market due
to heavy imports of maize under the agreement between the ec
the agreement guarantees access to the spanish market for
two mln tonnes of non-ec maize a year for the next four years.
the sources said the intervention price for the maize would
they said at this price it seemed unlikely that the full
they added the decision is also designed to prevent massive
offers of maize for intervention just ahead of the normal april
30 deadline, which could be caused by speculation about the
implementation of the accord with the united states.
japan buys 5,000 tonnes canadian rapeseed
rapeseed overnight at an undisclosed price for may shipment,
northern trust corp &lt;ntrs> 1st qtr net
shr 87 cts vs 73 cts
net 14.7 mln vs 11.7 mln
assets 8.38 billion vs 7.43 billion
loans 3.91 billion vs 3.40 billion
deposits 5.60 billion vs 5.08 billion
colombia jan exports up but coffee values fall
the value of colombian exports other than
coffee rose 55 pct in january compared with the same period
last year, apparently setting a trend for the trade balance in
1987, government statistics institute figures show.
they amounted to 180.8 mln dlrs fob compared with 147.5 mln
dlrs for coffee, a drop of 42 pct from last year.
the trade balance registered a 35 mln dlr surplus, compared
with a 56 mln dlr surplus in january 1986.
the national planning department forecast that in 1987
coffee, colombia's traditional major export, will account for
only one-third of total exports, or about 1.5 billion dlrs.
usg/taiwan 23.25 dlrs fio five days/1,500 1-10/5 continental.
trade banner - 30,000 long tons grain usg/morocco 13.50
reference new york grain freights 1 of april 8, ship
brokers say the vessel fixed by cam from the great lakes to
algeria at 28 dlrs is reported to be the vamand wave.
reference new york grain freights 2 of april 8, they say
the cory grain maize business from east london at 22 dlrs is to
japan and not to spain as reported.
fiji/prai 16 dlrs fio 10,000/1,000 1-10/5 fiji sugar marketing.
tbn 15,000 mt bulk sugar queensland/japan 14.65 dlrs fio
enquiries - antwerp/1-3 ports greece 40,000 mt bagged sugar
indications 750/750 in shipments of 10,000/15,000 tonnes spread
from may to july a/c unnamed charterer.
inchon/india 12,600 mt bagged sugar 1,000/1,000 20/4-5/5
reunion/1-2 ports portugal 10,000 mt bulk sugar about 20
dlrs 2,000/750 1-10/5 a/c french charterer.
antwerp/libya 5,500 mt bagged flour 14
new orleans/guanta 9,387 mt bulk hss 3,000/13 days
naantali/saudi red sea 30,000/35,000 mt barley 4,000/3,000
dunkirk/xingang 12,000 mt bagged flour 1,500/1,700 13-20/4.
toledo/seaforth 17,000 mt hss offers 18.50 dlrs four
river plate/malaysia 20,000/22,000 long tons hss
home savings bank &lt;hmsb> 1st qtr net
shr 51 cts vs not given
note: company went public in november 1986.
net includes loan loss provisions of 75,000 dlrs vs 30,000
dlrs and gains on sale of securities of 756,000 dlrs vs
1986 net includes tax credit 1,022,000 dlrs.
1987 net includes 2,400,000 dlr gain from tax credit
amoskeag bank shares inc &lt;amkg> 1st qtr net
shr 70 cts vs 67 cts
note: net includes pretax securities sales gains of
msr exploration ltd &lt;msr> year loss
shr loss five cts vs profit 10 cts
net loss 381,391 vs profit 736,974
proved oil reserves at year-end 3.3 mln barrels, up 39 pct
from a year earlier, and natural gas reserves 4.7 billion cubic
southmark &lt;sm> to offer special dividend
southmark corp said it will issue its
shareholders a special dividend right to acquire 22 shares of
american realty trust &lt;arb> for each 100 shares of southmark
each right entitles the holder to buy one share of
beneficial interest of american realty trust at a price of 3.75
southmark said the offer's record date is may 1, with an
ex-dividend date of april 27, adding that the it will issue the
rights to shareholders on may 6 and the offer will expire on
southmark said it received the rights on april 6 as the
holder of about 84 pct of american realty trust's outstanding
holders of fewer than 455 southmark shares who would
receive rights to acquire fewer than 100 american realty shares
will be paid cash in lieu of the rights distribution, the
southmark said it will compute the cash price paid based on
the average closing market price of the rights on the american
stock exchange for the first ten days the rights are traded,
in order to get the dividend for these rights a southmark
shareholder must own common stock on the ex-dividend date,
after that, southmark said its common stock will be traded
exports other than coffee rise sharply in colombia
colombian exports other than coffee rose
55 pct in january compared with the same period last year,
figures from the government statistics institute show.
non-coffee exports amounted to 180.8 mln dlrs fob compared
with 147.5 mln dlrs for coffee, a drop of 42 pct from last
the trade balance registered a 35 mln dlr surplus, compared
with a 56 mln dlr surplus in january 1986.
the national planning department forecast that in 1987
coffee, colombia's traditional major export, will account for
only one third of total exports, or about 1.5 billion dlrs.
taft broadcasting &lt;tfb> completes station sale
&lt;tvxg> said it has completed the previously-announced purchase
last week, tvx said the sale, which was scheduled to close
taft said the purchase price was 240 mln dlrs, as
previously announced. the price is subject to final
taft did not indicate the size of the gain, if any, it
it said the stations are wtaf-philadelphia,
u.s. march retail sales cut by late easter
were due to a late easter, according to analysts who expect a
"sales look soft because of the easter shift, but
underlying business is better than the numbers indicate," said
analysts generally average the sales results of march and
april to account for the variation of easter's occurance. this
year, easter is being observed on april 19, which is three
analyst edward johnson of johnson redbook associates said
sales for march rose an unadjusted 2.5 to 3.0 pct, and a
seasonally adjusted 5.5 pct to six pct, compared to an adjusted
"the obvious question is whether these numbers indicate
that the consumer activity is slowing, but it does not appear
to be because liquidity and employment are rising," said
analyst jeff edelman, analyst of drexel lambert and burnham.
overall, analysts said first half sales are coming in
according to expectations. sales for all of 1987 are expected
to rise about 5.5 pct to six pct, up a bit from 1986's rise.
in march, sales of housewares, furniture and big ticket
items were stronger than apparel sales, signaling to many
analysts that apparel sales will be strong in april as the
"sales gains in home appliances and home fashions reflect a
continuing strength in the housing market," said edward
brennan, chairman of sears roebuck and co &lt;s> which reported an
overall sales gain of 4.2 pct. brennan said sales of women's
"sears' total apparel sales was up only modestly, but even
a modest improvement in apparel is a very good accomplishment
due to the fact that most people will buy apparel in april,"
said c.j. lawrence analysts harry mortner.
j.c. penney co inc &lt;jcp> and dayton hudson corp &lt;dh> were
among the weaker performers with comparable stores sales
declining 1.5 pct and 4.9 pct, respectively. penney's store and
catalog sales declined 1.3 pct overall and dayton hudson's
penney chairman william howell said, "sales continued
strong for catalog operations and, geographically, ranged from
very active in the east to weak in the economically depressed
"penney's been shifting away from leisure time activity
wear to other apparel lines, which yield higher profit margins,
but are currently hurting sales," said greenstein of bear
hudson chairman kenneth mackes cited the late easter for
the decline. edelman of drexel said that "hudson had a tougher
comparison because it had an exceptionally good 1986."
most analysts agreed that promotions are slightly lower
"retailers are not planning for much - inventories are
being kept lean, markdowns are lower than last year, but sales
are coming through anyway," said cj analyst harry mortner.
mortner said he expects profits in the first quarter to
be better than he had originally expected in the beginning of
most retailers report their first quarter in the middle of
march retail sales for major u.s. retailers
sears       4.2     2.6 bil       2.5 bil
k mart      4.6     2.2 bil       2.1 bil
jc penney  (1.3)    1.1 bil       1.1 bil
wal-mart     32     1.1 bil       855 mln
federated   4.9     934 mln       891 mln
may         3.5     885 mln       855 mln
dayton      4.8     792 mln       756 mln
woolworth   0.2     591 mln       590 mln
zayre      12.7     522 mln       464 mln
first interstate expects brazil, ecuador loan actions to cut 1987 net by 15.4 mln dlrs
first interstate expects brazil, ecuador loan actions to cut 1987 net by 15.4 mln dlrs
morocco tenders for 55,000 tonnes pl 480 soyoil
morocco is scheduled to tender april 14
for a total of 55,000 tonnes of u.s. soyoil under pl-480 for
shipments from may through september, private export sources
the tender calls for shipment of 6,100 tonnes in may,
12,200 tonnes each in june, july and august and 12,300 tonnes
midlantic corp &lt;midl> 1st qtr net
shr diluted 1.18 dlrs vs 1.04 dlrs
net 45.0 mln vs 39.2 mln
assets 16.7 billion vs 15.2 billion
deposits 13.0 billion vs 12.1 billion
loans 11.9 billion vs 10.1 billion
note: results restated for merger of midlantic banks inc
and continental bancorp inc on january 30, 1987.
community bank system inc &lt;cbsi> 1st qtr net
shr 46 cts vs 49 cts
note: share adjusted for two-for-one stock split in may
qtly div 38 cts vs 35 cts prior
northern trust &lt;ntrs> net hurt by brazil loans
northern trust corp said its first
quarter earnings were reduced by 875,000 dlrs by placing 53.2
mln dlrs of loans to brazil and six mln dlrs in loans to
should these loans remain on nonperforming basis for the
rest of 1987, net income for year will be cut by about 3.2 mln
earlier it posted net income for the period of 14.7 mln
dlrs or 87 cts a share, up from 11.7 mln dlrs or 73 cts a
total nonperforming assets were 114.1 mln dlrs at march 31,
up from 53.4 mln dlrs at december 31 and 79 mln dlrs at march
the provision for loan losses for the first quarter was
eight mln dlrs compared to 11 mln a year ago. net loan charge
offs were six mln dlrs, down from 11 mln dlrs a year ago.
the reserve for loan losses was 78.1 mln dlrs, or two pct
of outstanding loans, higher than the 56 mln dlrs of 1.65 pct
of loans outstanding at march 31, 1986.
doe run raises lead price 0.50 ct to 26.50 cts
doe run company said it is
increasing the price of its corroding grade lead by one-half
cent to 26.50 cents a lb, effective immediately.
the price is quoted fob, herculaneum, mo., and fob, boss,
mo., with freight allowed for carload quantities.
spain's foreign reserves rise in february
spain's foreign reserves rose by 905 mln
dlrs in february to total 17.05 billion dlrs, compared with
14.11 billion dlrs in february 1986, bank of spain figures
under a new accounting system introduced this month,
spain's foreign reserves now exclude foreign currency held by
under the previous system, spain's foreign reserves would
have risen by 391 mln dlrs in february, taking into account a
fall of 514 mln dlrs in financial institutions' foreign
in january this year, the central bank's foreign reserves
rose by 143 mln dlrs, while financial institutions' foreign
currency position fell by 118 mln dlrs.
&lt;sulpetro ltd> 1st qtr jan 31 loss
net loss 9,900,000 vs loss 17,300,000
revs 14.7 mln vs 29.8 mln
western federal savings bank &lt;wfpr> 1st qtr net
shr 74 cts vs 92 cts
note: share adjusted for 10 pct stock dividend in july
company based in mayaguez, puerto rico.
final test inc &lt;fnlt> 4th qtr loss
shr loss six cts vs loss 88 cts
net loss 123,840 vs loss 1,298,377
shr profit six cts vs loss 1.47 dlrs
net profit 124,872 vs loss 2,171,011
has signed a letter of intent to assume &lt;liberty life insurance
co's> group insurance on july 1, subject to regulatory
a.o. smith corp &lt;smc> sets quarterlies
qtly divs class a and b 20 cts vs 20 cts
central bancorp inc &lt;cban> 1st qtr net
shr 1.02 dlrs vs 78 cts
net 14.4 mln vs 11.0 mln
note: 1987 net includes gain 2,222,000 dlrs from
results restated for pooled acquisitions and share adjusted
&lt;emcor> completes sale of stock to investors
the sale of 4.1 mln dlrs of stock to citicorp venture capital
ltd, concord ventures of dillon read and co and private
vlsi technology inc &lt;vlsi> 1st qtr net
shr seven cts vs six cts
revs 38.2 mln vs 34.3 mln
belgian current account surplus widens in 1986
measured on a cash basis, widened sharply to 134.9 billion
francs last year from 17.5 billion in 1985, the finance
the increase was due almost entirely to a sharp rise in the
goods trade surplus to 126.1 billion francs from 20.4 billion.
the services trade surpluses increased to 52.4 billion
francs from 38.9 billion while the deficit on transfers rose
slightly to 43.6 billion from 41.8 billion.
private sector capital operations showed a steeply higher
deficit of 160.7 billion francs after 56.9 billion in 1985.
silicon systems inc &lt;slcn> 2nd qtr march 28
shr profit five cts vs profit two cts
net profit 325,000 vs profit 105,000
revs 19.5 mln vs 16.1 mln
shr profit nine cts vs loss 35 cts
net profit 627,000 vs loss 2,280,000
revs 36.9 mln vs 27.4 mln
disease puts zimbabwe beef exports in jeopardy
zimbabwe's beef exports to the european
community (ec), potentially worth 70 mln zimbabwean dlrs this
year, may be jeopardised by an outbreak of foot and mouth
disease in southwestern matabeleland, industry sources said.
the country has temporarily suspended beef exports to the
ec because of the outbreak and awaits a decision from the ec
veterinary committee, which is considering a formal ban.
the outbreak in the country's main ranching province has
already led neighbouring beef-producing botswana and zambia to
bar beef and dairy imports from zimbabwe, threatening the dairy
industry with a loss of at least one mln dlrs in export
"the situation is still uncertain at the moment. normally
when an outbreak occurs there is an automatic suspension of
beef exports," one industry source said yesterday.
commenting on ec policy, he explained, "depending on the
seriousness of the outbreak the (veterinary) committee then
decides on three options, allowing us to continue exporting
beef from disease-free areas, clamping a three-month suspension
on exports or banning us from exporting for a year. we are
still awaiting their decision," he added, asking not to be
zimbabwe was granted an export quota of 8,100 tonnes of
high-grade beef to ec markets in 1985 after the country had
spent millions of dollars erecting disease-control fences and
upgrading abattoirs to meet stringent ec rules.
should the ec ban zimbabwean exports, the country will be
forced to sell its beef on glutted world beef markets at low
prices, the source said. projected earnings from beef sales
could fall about 23 mln dlrs as a result, he said.
shawmut corp &lt;shas> 1st qtr net
shr 1.32 dlrs vs 1.26 dlrs
net 21.2 mln vs 17.4 mln
avg shrs 16.1 mln vs 13.8 mln
assets 10.0 billion vs 8.4 billion
deposits 7.2 billion vs 6.1 billion
loans 6.7 billion up 26 pct
note: results restated for pooled acquisitions of shawmut
home bank and fidelity trust co and include first gibraltar
mortgage corp from december 30, 1986 purchase.
loan loss provision 8,800,000 dlrs vs 6,300,000 dlrs.
minntech &lt;mntx> sees first quarter loss
to report loss for its fiscal 1988 first quarter to end june
30, due to start-up costs related to a new membrane oxygenator
however, revenues and earnings should consistently increase
throughout the remainder of the year, president louis cosentino
said geologists located more than one mln tons of gold-bearing
deposits, 0.057 ounces per ton, at cape spencer.
the company said it plans to invest 2.5 mln canadian dlrs
to expand on-site treatment facilities to process 100,000 tons
of gold-bearing deposits this year and 200,000 tons in 1988.
prior to the completion of the recent exploration program,
gordex estimated the cape spencer deposit had 200,000 tons.
gordex said the expansion of the cape spencer facilities is
intented to enable it to operate 24 hours a day throughout the
u.s. congressman introduces reagan sugar bill
in the house of representatives legislation proposed by the
reagan administration to slash the u.s. sugar price support, a
the spokesman said the bill was introduced without any
changes from the administration's proposal sent to congress
that plan calls for a cut in the sugar loan rate to 12
cents per pound from 18 cents now. sugar growers would be
compensated for the price cut with targeted direct payments,
to be gradually phased-out through 1990. the payments to
growers would cost an estimated 1.1 billion dlrs.
representatives of sugar growers have rejected the
proposal, saying it would ruin the domestic sugar industry.
canada 91-day t-bills average 6.95 pct, making bank rate 7.20 pct
canada 91-day t-bills average 6.95 pct, making bank rate 7.20 pct
republic savings and loan &lt;rsla> 3rd qtr net
shr 89 cts vs not available
note: company converted to stock ownership effective august
periods end march 31, 1987 and 1986 respectively.
southmark &lt;sm> to issue american realty rights
southmark corp said shareholders will be
issued, as a special dividend, rights to acquire 22 shares of
american realty trust &lt;arb> for each 100 shares of southmark
the record date for southmark shareholders to receive these
rights will be may one with an ex-dividend date of april 27.
southmark received these rights on april six, as the holder
of about 84 pct of american realty trust's outstanding shares.
heavy trading in ual inc, traders said.
ual rose 1-5/8 to 73-5/8 on volume of more than two mln
shares, after trading with little upward movement earlier in
traders said rumors, which began yesterday, added to
speculation that the company would be the target of a takeover.
they said it was believed coniston partners and the
pritzker family of chicago were buying the stock.
coniston declined comment and the pritzkers had no comment.
traders said there was speculation a bidder might appear,
and also that real estate developer donald trump, who holds a
stake in ual, might participate in a takeover bid. ual pilots
said they would be willing to pay 4.5 billion dlrs, which
includes debt, for the company's united airlines unit.
gordex minerals locates canada gold deposits
said geologists located more than one mln short tons of
gold-bearing deposits, 0.057 ounces per ton, at cape spencer.
the company said it plans to invest 2.5 mln canadian dlrs
to expand on-site treatment facilities to process 100,000 tons
of gold-bearing deposits this year and 200,000 tons in 1988.
prior to the completion of the recent exploration program,
gordex estimated the cape spencer deposit had 200,000 tons.
gordex said the expansion of the cape spencer facilities is
intended to enable operation 24 hours a day throughout the
canadian bank rate rises in week
canada's key bank rate rose to 7.20 pct
from 7.15 pct the week before, bank of canada said.
bank rate is set 1/4 percentage point above the average
yield on the weekly issue of 91-day treasury bills. this week's
yield was 6.95 pct compared with the previous week's 6.90 pct.
tenders were accepted for 2.55 billion dlrs of 91-day bills
at an average price of 98.296 dlrs against 98.310 dlrs last
the 1.40 billion dlrs of 182-day bills were priced at an
average 96.488 dlrs against 96.549 dlrs last week, to yield an
average 7.30 pct, versus 7.17 pct last week.
the 500 mln dlrs of 364-day bills were priced at an average
92.969 dlrs against 93.159 dlrs last week, to yield an average
7.58 pct versus 7.38 pct last week.
tenders will be received next week for 2.50 billion dlrs of
91-day bills, 1.40 billion dlrs of 182-day bills and 500 mln
consensus seen on tin pact extension
international tin council (itc) continued without formal
agreement on an extension of the sixth international tin
agreement (ita), but delegates said it was apparent there was a
general consensus the agreement should be prolonged.
some delegations are still awaiting formal instructions
from capitals, but informally most have indicated they favour
this afternoon's session was used by delegates to seek
further clarification on some of the issues involved, and to
some sources were optimistic a resolution on an extension
could be passed tomorrow but others suggested a special session
would be convened to adopt the resolution after the association
of tin producing countries meeting april 14 to 16.
the full council session resumes tomorrow at 1330 gmt after
a european community coordination meeting at 1100.
slater electric inc &lt;slat> 1st qtr feb 28 net
shr four cts vs 10 cts
south jersey industries inc &lt;sji> 1st qtr net
oper shr 1.64 dlrs vs 1.50 dlrs
oper shr 2.76 dlrs vs 2.58 dlrs
oper net 10.4 mln vs 9,600,000
note: net income including discontinued operation and, in
both 1986 periods, 1,500,000 dlr gain from change in accounting
for which results restated, 6,200,000 dlrs vs 7,200,000 dlrs in
quarter and 10.6 mln dlrs vs 11.6 mln dlrs.
city national corp &lt;ctyn> 1st qtr net
shr 56 cts vs 35 cts
loans 1.44 billion vs 1.20 billion
deposits 2.36 billion vs 1.96 billion
assets 2.96 billion vs 2.55 billion
allied bankshares inc &lt;abga> 1st qtr net
shr 50 cts vs 26 cts
note: qtr 1987 includes tax gain 500,000 dlrs, or 19 cts
royal dutch &lt;rd> unit to cut heating oil price
co subsidiary said it will reduce the price it charges contract
barge customers in new york harbor for heating oil by 2.5 cts a
the company said the price cut will bring the contract
barge price for heating oil to 51 cts a gallon.
magma raises copper price 0.25 ct to 65.75 cts
magma copper co, a subsidiary of
newmont mining corp, said it is raising its copper cathode
price by 0.25 cent to 65.75 cents a lb, effective immediately.
first bank system inc &lt;fbs> 1st qtr net
shr 95 cts vs 80 cts
net 57.4 mln vs 46.6 mln
assets 28.39 billion vs 25.87 billion
loans 13.99 billion vs 14.35 billion
centerre bancorp &lt;ctbc> 1st qtr net
shr 94 cts vs 1.02 dlrs
loans 2.88 billion vs 2.94 billion
deposits 4.05 billion vs 3.73 billion
assets 5.43 billion vs 5.14 billion
sea galley stores inc &lt;seag> 1st qtr net
oper shr four cts vs one ct
revs 12.8 mln vs 14.8 mln
note: current qtr figures exclude operating loss
carryforward gain of 57,000 dlrs, or two cts per share vs gain
of 21,000 dlrs, or one ct per share.
egypt has cancelled its april 2 tender for
200,000 tonnes of any origin wheat for april 15-30 shipment,
trade and egyptian official sources said.
trade sources said the cancellation followed an offer by an
egyptian company, islamic corp, at 85.80 dlrs/tonne cost and
freight, undercutting other traders' offers of between 93.90
an egyptian trade official in paris confirmed cancellation
of the tender following the islamic corp offer, which he said
the government had refused for legal reasons.
the official denied trade reports that the government might
have substituted a private deal with islamic corp for the
house panel wants pentagon manage u.s. stockpile
has voted for a transfer in the management of stockpiled
materials for national defense to the u.s. defense secretary.
the committee also voted for legally-binding quantity and
quality requirements on the materials, mostly metals.
the measures are a part of the defense authorization bill
which will be voted on in the house next month.
the purpose of the measures, passed by the committee
yesterday, is to improve stockpile management and discourage
sell-offs of materials that could jeopardize strategic needs, a
staff member of the committee told reuters.
"they (the stockpiles) stand to gain the most by being
managed properly," said the staffer. "management of the stockpile
over the last 10 years has been atrocious."
responsibility for stockpile management now belongs to a
white house agency, the federal emergency management agency.
the staffer said under the measures passed by the committee
the secretary of defense would have more influence over
decisions to keep or sell strategic stockpile materials.
the administration has proposed a goal of 700 million dlrs
worth of strategic materials to be held in the stockpile. the
stockpile now contains around 10 billion dlrs of materials.
he said several agencies currently helped fema to manage
the stockpile and decide how much to sell to help the deficit.
these agencies included the office of management and budget
and the departments of interior and commerce, he said.
the committee believed the shared involvement in stockpile
canada trade rise seen as start of recovery
considerably, underscoring economists' predictions the sector
would post a long awaited recovery this year.
the federal government reported today that the monthly
surplus soared to 1.25 billion canadian dlrs in february,
double january's 623 mln dlrs surplus and sharply higher than
february 1986's 189 mln dlr tally.
"hopefully it's the beginning of a trend," said richardson
greenshields of canada ltd economist susan clark in toronto.
economists generally don't expect such large gains over the
next months, but are looking for an upward trend throughout the
"we thought the trade balance would improve ... over the
year, and it certainly looks as if this morning's figure is
indicative of that," commented economist james donegan at the
toronto securities firm of midland doherty ltd.
statistics canada reported the surplus was driven by a 23
pct gain in automobile product exports to a record 3.2 billion
"recovery in the automotive sector helped push the value of
exports up by 5.9 pct in february," the agency said in its
total exports expanded to 10.44 billion dlrs from 9.85
billion dlrs in february, while imports slipped to 9.19 billion
economists have predicted the 1987 trade surplus would end
up three to five billion dlrs higher than last year's dismal
10.1 billion dlr total. in 1985 the surplus was 17.48 billion
money market analysts said the positive trade news touched
off a modest rally in the canadian dollar, which rose to 76.85
u.s. cts on north american markets early this morning after
the currency was hovering around 76.78 cts in early
economists have been banking on an improved trade
performance this year to stimulate an otherwise sluggish
money market analysts said the positive trade news touched
off a modest rally in the canadian dollar, which rose to 76.85
u.s. cts on north american markets early this morning after
the currency was hovering around 76.78 cts in early
economists have been banking on an improved trade
performance this year to stimulate an otherwise sluggish
they say the country's consumers, who have been spending at
a torrid pace in recent years, will sharply curtail outlays
this year and this should help curtail the flow of imports into
meanwhile, demand for canadian exports in the united
states, by far the country's largest market, is expected to be
strong as a result of a projected rise in american consumer
spending and the relatively low value of the canadian currency.
"we maintain what's going to drive canada's export
performance is income growth in the u.s.," said midland's
but at the bank of nova scotia, deputy chief economist
warren jestin was less optimistic about the u.s. outlook and
said it could be a mistake to read too much into february's
jestin said, "given the fact the u.s. economy is showing
signs of weakening--particularly car sales--it would indicate
that part of the strength (in canada's trade figures) is
first bank &lt;fbs> sees loss on brazilian loans
first bank systems inc, in reporting
higher first quarter net, said that if interest is not paid on
the 140 mln dlrs in brazilian loans and nine mln dlrs in
ecuadorian loans for the rest of 1987, its profits for the
entire year will be cut by 6.9 mln dlrs.
the banking firm said the non-performing status of these
loans cut first quarter net by 1.7 mln dlrs.
earlier it reported first quarter profits of 57.4 mln dlrs
or 95 cts a share, up from 46.6 mln dlrs or 80 cts a share in
nonaccrual loans, restructured loans and other real estate
were 637 mln dlrs, or 2.24 pct of total assets, compared to 514
mln dlrs or 1.84 pct of assets at the end of 1986 and 636.1
mln, or 2.46 pct of assets at march 31, 1986.
the provision for loan losses in the quarter was 35 mln
dlrs, compared to 152.1 mln in the first quarter 1986, when
there was a special addition to the reserve of 100 mln dlrs.
net charge offs were 34.7 mln, compared to 41.1 mln dlrs a year
usda estimates 1986/87 ussr grain imports  28.0 mln tonnes vs 26.0 in march, 29.9 year ago
usda estimates 1986/87 ussr grain imports  28.0 mln tonnes vs 26.0 in march, 29.9 year ago
usda estimates 1986 soviet grain crop  at 210 mln tonnes vs 210 in march, 192 year-ago
usda estimates 1986 soviet grain crop  at 210 mln tonnes vs 210 in march, 192 year-ago
usda - u.s. 1986/87 ending corn stocks  5,240 mln bu, wheat 1,848 mln, soybeans 610 mln
usda - u.s. 1986/87 ending corn stocks  5,240 mln bu, wheat 1,848 mln, soybeans 610 mln
usda 1986/87 u.s. orange crop 190,050,000  boxes, florida crop 122,900,000 boxes
usda 1986/87 u.s. orange crop 190,050,000  boxes, florida crop 122,900,000 boxes
usda estimates 1986/87 orange juice yield  at 1.50 gals per box from florida crop
usda estimates 1986/87 orange juice yield  at 1.50 gals per box from florida crop
vornado inc &lt;vno> 4th qtr jan 31 net
oper shr 1.64 dlrs vs 84 cts
revs 20.1 mln vs 19.0 mln
oper shr 4.46 dlrs vs 3.20 dlrs
oper net 14.1 mln vs 10.9 mln
revs 74.6 mln vs 68.0 mln
note: operating net excludes gains of nothing vs 2,444,000
dlrs, or 72 cts a share, in quarter and 1,890,000 dlrs, or 60
cts a share, vs 9,3267,000 dlrs, or 2.72 dlrs a share, in year
first union corp first qtr shr 71 cts vs 61 cts
first union corp first qtr shr 71 cts vs 61 cts
following are highlights of the u.s.
agriculture department supply/demand projections for the
1986/87 seasons, in mln bushels, with comparisons, unless noted
corn -- stocks, aug 31, 1987, at 5,240, vs 5,595 last
month. stocks, aug 31, 1986, at 4,040, vs 4,040 last month.
exports projected at 1,375, vs 1,250 last month. exports in
1985/86 at 1,241, vs 1,241 last month.
domestic use at 5,680, vs 5,450 last month. usage in the
1985/86 season at 5,255, vs 5,255 last month.
wheat -- stocks, may 31, 1987, projected at 1,848, vs 1,877
last month. stocks on may 31, 1986, at 1,905, vs 1,905 last
exports in 1986/87 season at 1,025, vs 1,025 last month.
1985/86 season at 915, vs 915 last month.
domestic use in 1986/87 at 1,134, vs 1,105 last month.
1985/86 at 1,045, vs 1,045 last month.
cotton -- in mln 480 lb bales - stocks, july 31, 1987, at
5.40, vs 5.49 last month. stocks july 31, 1986, at 9.35, vs
exports in 1986/87 season at 6.66, vs 6.76 last month.
exports in 1985/86 - 1.96, vs 1.96 last month.
soybeans -- in mln bushels - stocks, aug 31, 1987,
projected at 610, vs 635 last month. stocks aug 31, 1986, at
soybean crushings during 1986/87 - 1,130, vs 1,115 last
month. crushings in 1985/86 at 1,053, vs 1,053 last month.
exports in 1986/87 season at 700, vs 700 last month.
exports in 1985/86 at 740, vs 740 last month.
soybean oil -- mln lbs - stocks on sept 30, 1987, at 1,360,
vs 1,200 last month. stocks on sept 30, 1986, at 947,  vs 947
exports in 1986/87 at 1,350, vs 1,350 last month.  exports
in 1985/86 at 1,257, vs 1,257 last month.
soybean cake/meal -- thousand short tons - stocks, sept 30,
1987, at 270, vs 315 last month. stocks, sept 30, 1986, at 212,
exports in 1986/87 season at 6,500, vs 6,350 last month.
exports in 1985/86 at 6,036, vs 6,008 last month.
u.s. citrus crop estimate -- usda
estimated 1986/87 citrus production, as follows (in boxes) --
total u.s. orange crop (excluding florida temples) --
190,050,000 boxes, vs 190,850,000 boxes last month and
176,410,000 boxes in the 1985/86 crop.
florida oranges (excluding temples) -- 122,900,000 boxes,
vs 124,000,000 last month and 119,000,000 boxes in 1985/86.
florida temples -- 3,400,000 boxes, vs 3,400,000 last month
the department's estimates are based on april 1 crop
projected an average yield of 1.50 gallons of frozen
concentrated orange juice per box (42.0 degree brix equivalent)
that compares with 1.47 gallons per box previously and 1.38
gallons per box from the 1985/86 crop.
the crop reporting board said the estimates for the 1986/87
season are based on maturity and yields tests as of april 1.
ussr adds u.s. corn to commitments - usda
the soviet union has added 175,600
tonnes of u.s. corn to its previous commitments for delivery in
the fourth year of the u.s.-ussr grain supply agreement, which
began october 1, 1986, the u.s. agriculture department said.
according to the department's export sales report, covering
transactions in the week ended april 2, corn transactions
consisted of 140,600 tonnes of new sales and changes in
total corn commitments to the ussr  for delivery in the
fourth agreement year amount to 2,825,600 tonnes. the soviets
have not purchased wheat or soybeans in the fourth year of the
estimated 1987 spring potato production, based on april 1
conditions, at 19,267,000 cwts (100 lbs), vs 19,822,000 cwts
the department estimated spring potato area for harvest at
79,100 acres, vs 76,700 acres estimated last month and 75,900
spring potato yield per harvested acre is forecast at 244
cwt per acre, vs 261 cwt per acre a year ago, usda said.
the following revisions for 1986 crop summer potatoes --
production -- 21,003,000 cwt (100 lbs), vs 20,900,000 cwt
acreage for harvest -- 95,700 acres, vs 95,800 acres
yield per harvested acre -- 219 cwt per acre, vs 218 cwt
per acre previously estimated, the department said.
usda details free grain stocks under loan
projected carryover free stocks of feedgrains, corn and wheat
under loans, with comparisons, as follows, in mln bushels,
except feedgrains, which is in mln tonnes --
under regular nine month loan --
special producer storage loan program --
earlier received a 96 mln dlr takeover offer from j.p.
industries inc &lt;jpi>, said it amended its shareholder rights
plan so that certain provisions of the plan cannot occur until
the board determines that it is in the best interests of the
the plan, adopted in december 1986, permits clevite to
issue shares at half price to existing stockholders and allows
stockholders to buy shares of an unfriendly bidder at half
clevite said the amendments by its board effectively mean
that the so-called flip-in and flip-over provisions of its
rights plan can only be triggered by affirmative board
the company said it acted inview of the proposed
acquisition and because certain debt restrictions could block
its ability to redeem the rights.
usda estimates soviet wheat, coarse grains
forecast the soviet 1986/87 wheat crop at 92.30 mln tonnes, vs
92.30 mln tonnes last month. it put the 1985/86 crop at 78.10
mln tonnes, vs 78.10 mln tonnes last month.
soviet 1986/87 coarse grain production is estimated at
103.30 mln tonnes, vs 103.30 mln tonnes last month. production
in 1985/86 is projected at 99.99 mln tonnes, vs 100.00 mln
ussr wheat imports are forecast at 15.00 mln tonnes in
1986/87, vs 15.00 mln tonnes last month. imports in 1985/86 are
put at 15.70 mln tonnes, vs 15.70 mln tonnes last month. usda
estimated soviet 1986/87 coarse grain imports at 12.00 mln
tonnes, vs 10.00 mln tonnes last month, and 1985/86 imports at
13.70 mln tonnes, vs 13.70 mln tonnes last month.
usda said soviet coarse grain imports include 1986/87 corn
imports, which it forecast at 8.00 mln tonnes, vs 6.00 mln
tonnes last month. corn imports in 1985/86 are estimated at
10.40 mln tonnes, vs 10.40 mln last month.
total soviet grain imports in 1986/87, at 28.0 mln tonnes,
include one mln tonnes of miscellaneous grains.
the 1986/87 breakdown of supply and distribution for wheats by
classes, in mln bushels, with comparisons, as follows.
start stocks 1,009   1,009      717     717
ttl supply-x 2,027   2,027    1,947   1,947
domestic use   599     579      543     543
total use    1,049   1,054      938     938
end stocks     978     973    1,009   1,009
note - season begins june 1. x-includes imports
start stocks   498     498      371     371
ttl supply-x   956     956      838     838
domestic use   218     192      174     174
total use      418     382      340     340
end stocks     538     574      498     498
note - season begins june 1. x-includes imports.
start stocks   79     79       64     64
ttl supply-x  369    369      432    432
domestic use  181    193      204    204
total use     301    313      353    353
end stocks     68     56       79     79
note - season begins june 1. x-includes imports
start stocks  198    198      173    173
ttl supply-x  433    433      430    430
domestic use   82     83       80     80
total use     252    243      232    232
end stocks    181    190      198    198
note - season begins june 1. x-includes imports.
start stocks   121    121      100    100
ttl supply-x   221    221      218    218
domestic use    54     58       44     44
total use      139    138       97     97
end stocks      82     83      121    121
note - season begins june 1. x-includes imports.
forecast brazil's 1986/87 soybean crop at 17.00 mln tonnes, vs
17.00 estimated last month. it put the 1985/86 crop at 13.90
mln tonnes, vs 13.70 mln last month.
the department forecast argentina's 1986/87 soybean crop at
7.70 mln tonnes, vs 7.70 mln last month. it projected the
1985/86 crop at 7.30 mln tonnes, vs 7.30 mln last month.
brazil's 1986/87 soybean exports were forecast at 2.50 mln
tonnes, vs 2.50 mln tonnes estimated last month. usda projected
1985/86 exports at 1.20 mln tonnes, vs 1.20 mln last month.
usda estimates argentine coarse grain, wheat
forecast argentina's 1986/87 coarse grain crop at 13.99 mln
tonnes, vs 15.44 mln tonnes last month. it estimated the
1985/86 crop at 17.06 mln tonnes, vs 17.14 mln last month.
usda forecast argentina's 1986/87 wheat crop at 9.00 mln
tonnes, vs 9.00 mln tonnes last month, while the 1985/86 crop
was projected at 8.50 mln tonnes, vs 8.50 mln last month.
usda forecast argentine 1986/87 coarse grain exports at
6.60 mln tonnes, vs 7.73 mln tonnes last month, and projected
1985/86 exports at 9.43 mln tonnes, vs 9.58 mln last month.
stop and shop cos in 2-for-1 split, hikes dividend
stop and shop cos in 2-for-1 split, hikes dividend
forecast australia's 1986/87 wheat crop at 16.70 mln tonnes, vs
17.30 mln tonnes last month. it estimated 1985/86 output at
16.13 mln tonnes, vs 16.13 mln last month.
australian wheat exports in 1986/87 are forecast at 14.50
mln tonnes, vs 14.50 mln tonnes last month, while exports in
1985/86 are estimated at 15.96 mln tonnes, vs 15.96 mln last
projected china's 1986/87 wheat crop at 90.30 mln tonnes, vs
88.50 mln tonnes last month. it estimated the 1985/86 crop at
85.81 mln tonnes, vs 85.81 mln last month.
usda projected china's 1986/87 wheat imports at 7.00 mln
tonnes, vs 7.00 mln tonnes last month, and estimated 1985/86
imports at 6.60 mln tonnes, vs 6.60 mln last month.
estimated canada's 1986/87 wheat crop at 31.85 mln tonnes, vs
31.85 mln tonnes last month. it estimated 1985/86 output at
24.25 mln tonnes, vs 24.25 mln last month.
canadian 1986/87 coarse grain production is projected at
27.62 mln tonnes, vs 27.62 mln tonnes last month. production in
1985/86 is estimated at 24.95 mln tonnes, vs 24.95 mln last
canadian wheat exports in 1986/87 are forecast at 19.00 mln
tonnes, vs 19.00 mln tonnes last month. exports in 1985/86 are
estimated at 17.72 mln tonnes, vs 17.71 mln last month.
net change in export commitments -- usda
the net change in export commitments, including sales,
cancellations, foreign purchases and cumulative exports, in the
current seasons through the week ended april 2, with
comparisons, as follows, in tonnes, except as noted --
the indicated totals include reported commitments to both
named and unnamed destinations, sales on exporters' own account
and optional origin sales plus actual exports already made
the usda cautions that reported outstanding sales are
subject to modification, deferral or cancellation and it is
unlikely that all reported quantities will be exported.
usda gave detailed breakdowns for the 1986/87 and 1987/88
seasons as follows, in thousand tonnes unless stated --
(a) - firm sales to a declared destination.
(b) - ultimate destination not yet declared.
(c) - sales made on exporters' own account.
(d) - exporter holds option to fill commitment with supplies
(e) - accumulated exports since season began based on data
(f) - indicated total for season.
(g) - usda-projected exports for season.
note -- totals may not add due to rounding.
4/2/87   prev wk  4/3/87 prev wk
gr total   3,310.9   3,837.9 1,679.0 1,692.7
4/2/87   prev wk   4/2/87  prev wk
gr total   2,293.4  2,323.5     215.9   245.9
4/2/87    prev wk    4/2/87 prev wk
gr total   9,734.3   9,846.9    772.1   268.8
4/2/87  prev wk    4/2/87 prev wk
gr total   1,141.3  1,094.6     10.2-x   nil
4/2/87  prev wk   4/2/87   prev wk
gr total    321.0   401.9       nil    nil
note - includes bulgur, semolina, farina, rolled, cracked and
4/2/87  prev wk    4/2/87  prev wk
gr total    15.8    20.9      nil     nil
4/2/87  prev wk    4/2/87 prev wk
gr total     866.7    969.8    50.7      48.4
4/2/87  prev wk   4/2/87   prev wk
gr total    15.4    15.2       nil     nil
4/2/87    prev wk   4/2/87  prev wk
gr total   2,028.2  2,096.3     468.2   457.2
4/2/87   prev wk     4/2/87 prev wk
gr total     597.1    622.1      nil      nil
4/2/87 prev wk    4/2/87  prev wk
gr total    nil    nil       nil    nil
4/2/87   prev wk    4/2/87  prev wk
gr total     348.6    370.1      nil     nil
4/2/87   prev wk     4/2/87  prev wk
gr total  1,818.5  2,090.2   1,000.6 1,020.2
4/2/87  prev wk    4/2/87   prev wk
gr total    529.5    616.6     52.0    52.0
4/2/87   prev wk    4/2/87   prev wk
gr total   607.1    637.5    164.7   164.7
4/2/87   prev wk    4/2/87  prev wk
gr total   222.2    360.0      93.4   93.4
4/2/87  prev wk     4/2/87  prev wk
gr total    133.6    133.6    368.3   362.5
country and destinations of the identified sales of
commodities reported by exporters in week ended april 2 for
the respective marketing seasons were detailed by the usda as
follows, with comparisons for the previous week, in thousands
4/2/87  prev wk   4/2/87   prev wk
east europe 261.0   346.0      25.0    25.0
4/2/87  prev wk    4/2/87  prev wk
4/2/87   prev wk   4/2/87   prev wk
east europe 101.0     101.0     nil      nil
4/2/87  prev wk    4/2/87  prev wk
4/2/87   prev wk   4/2/87   prev wk
east europe   nil    36.0      nil    nil
4/2/87   prev wk   4/2/87  prev wk
e. europe      94.0     50.0      50.0    50.0
4/2/87  prev wk     4/2/87 prev wk
e. europe     3.1      3.1      nil     nil
house panel wants pentagon manage u.s. stockpile
has voted for a transfer in the management of stockpiled
materials for national defense to the u.s. defense secretary.
the committee also voted for legally-binding quantity and
quality requirements on the materials, mostly metals.
the measures are a part of the defense authorization bill
which will be voted on in the house next month.
the purpose of the measures, passed by the committee
yesterday, is to improve stockpile management and discourage
sell-offs of materials that could jeopardize strategic needs, a
staff member of the committee told reuters.
"they (the stockpiles) stand to gain the most by being
managed properly," said the staffer. "management of the stockpile
over the last 10 years has been atrocious."
responsibility for stockpile management now belongs to a
white house agency, the federal emergency management agency.
the staffer said that under the measures passed by the
committee the secretary of defense would have more influence
over decisions to keep or sell strategic stockpile materials.
the administration has proposed a goal of 700 million dlrs
worth of strategic materials to be held in the stockpile. the
stockpile now contains around 10 billion dlrs of materials.
he said several agencies currently helped fema to manage
the stockpile and decide how much to sell to help the deficit.
these agencies included the office of management and budget
and the departments of interior and commerce, he said.
the committee believed the shared involvement in stockpile
forecast the european community's 1986/87 wheat crop at 71.60
mln tonnes, vs 71.50 mln tonnes last month. it estimated
1985/86 output at 71.70 mln tonnes, vs 71.71 mln last month.
e.c. 1986/87 coarse grain production is projected at 81.22
mln tonnes, vs 81.19 mln tonnes last month. the 1985/86 crop is
estimated at 88.21 mln tonnes, vs 88.28 mln last month.
e.c. wheat exports in 1986/87 are forecast at 28.22 mln
tonnes, vs 28.31 mln tonnes last month. exports in 1985/86 are
estimated at 27.77 mln tonnes, vs 27.62 last month.
the following supply/demand projections for the 1986/87
seasons, in mln bushels, with comparisons, unless noted --
yield (bu)  119.3   119.3    118.0   118.0
start stock  4,040   4,040    1,648   1,648
usage: feed  4,500    4,300     4,095    4,126
ttl domest  5,680    5,450     5,255    5,255
total use  7,055    6,700     6,496    6,496
end stocks  5,240    5,595     4,040    4,040
farmer reser 1,400    1,300       564      564
ccc stocks  1,700    1,500       546      546
free stocks  2,140    2,795     2,930    2,930
note - price in dlrs per bu. corn season begins sept 1.
start stcks  1,905   1,905    1,425   1,425
usage: food    700    690       678    678
ttl domest  1,134  1,105     1,045  1,045
total use  2,159  2,130     1,960  1,960
end stocks  1,848  1,877     1,905  1,905
farmer reser   475    450       433    433
ccc stocks    950    950       602    602
free stocks    423    477       870    870
avg price  2.30-40  2.30-40   3.08   3.08
note - price in dlrs per bushel. wheat season begins june 1.
yield (bu)   33.8   33.8     34.1   34.1
start stocks    536    536      316    316
total use  1,933   1,908      1,879   1,879
end stocks    610     635        536     536
avg price 4.60-4.80 4.60-4.80   5.05    5.05
note - average price in dlrs per bushel. soybean season begins
yld (tonnes)   2.48    2.48      2.45    2.45
start stocks  126.4   126.4      57.5    57.5
x - includes corn, sorghum, barley, oats.
usage: feed  140.6   136.2     134.8   135.5
ttl domest  176.4   171.2     169.8   169.8
total use  220.3   211.9     206.4   206.4
end stocks  159.1   167.5     126.4   126.4
farmer reser  39.0    36.5      16.6    16.6
ccc stocks   55.2    49.5      20.4    20.4
free stocks   64.8    81.5      89.3    89.3
x - includes corn, sorghum, oats, barley. seasons for oats,
barley began june 1, corn and sorghum sept 1.
start stcks     947     947       632     632
note - 1985/86 production estimates based on october year
end stcks   1,360     1,200       947      947
note - average price in cents per lb. season for soybean oil
soybean cake/meal, in thousand short tons --
start stcks     212     212       387     387
note - 1985/86 production estimates based on october year
end stcks      270     315       212     212
note - price in dlrs per short ton. season for soybean cake
yield (lbs)    549     553       630     630
start stks-x   9.35    9.35      4.10    4.10
ttl supply-y  19.06   19.14     17.57   17.57
x - based on census bureau data. y - includes imports.
end stocks   5.40    5.49     9.35    9.35
avge price  51.7-x  51.7-x   56.50   56.50
x - 1986/87 price is weighted average for first five months of
marketing year, not a projection for 1986/87. average price in
cents per lb. cotton season begins august 1.
yield (lbs)  5,648   5,648     5,414   5,414
start stcks   77.3    77.3      64.7    64.7
end stocks   66.9    66.9      77.3    77.3
ccc stocks   42.9    42.9      41.5    41.5
free stocks   24.0    24.0      35.8    35.8
note - average price in dlrs per cwt. y-rough equivalent.
n.a.-not available, usda revising price definition due to
marketing loan. rice season begins august 1.
yield (bu)  67.7    67.7     66.8    66.8
start stcks   551     551      300     300
ttl domest   580     605      691     691
total use     805     830       869     869
end stocks     688     663       551     551
avge price  1.30-50  1.30-50    1.93    1.93
note - price in dlrs per bushel. sorghum season begins sept 1.
yield (bu)  50.8    50.8      51.0    51.0
start stocks   325     325       247     247
ttl domest  475    475       500    500
total use  625    625       522    522
end stocks  316    316       325    325
note - average price in dlrs per bushel. barley season begins
yield (bu)  56.0   56.0      63.7   63.7
start stcks   184    184       180    180
ttl domes   485     485       543     543
end stcks   111     111       184     184
note - average price in dlrs per bushel. oats season begins
long grain rice, in mln cwts (100 lbs) --
acres (mln)   1.83    1.83     1.94    1.94
yield (lbs)  5,358   5,358    5,168   5,168
start stks   49.3    49.3     37.7    37.7
ttl supply  148.6   148.6    140.1   140.1
note -- starting stocks does not include broken kernels --
supply minus use does not equal ending stocks in breakdowns.
total supply includes imports but not broken kernels.
long grain rice, in mln cwts (100 lbs), cont. --
domestic use   43.0    43.0      48.8    48.8
total use  108.0   103.0      90.8    90.8
end stocks-x   40.6    45.6      49.3    49.3
note - average price in dlrs per cwt. x-broken kernels not
included -- supply minus use does not equal ending stocks in
breakdowns. rice season begins august 1.
medium, short grain rice - in mln cwts (100 lbs) --
acres (mln)   0.55    0.55     0.55    0.55
yield (lbs)  6,651   6,651    6,258   6,258
start stks   26.7    26.7     25.7    25.7
ttl supply   65.3    65.3     61.7    61.7
note -- starting stocks does not include broken kernels --
supply minus use does not equal ending stocks in breakdowns.
total supply includes imports but not broken kernels.
medium, short grain rice, in mln cwts (100 lbs), cont. --
domestic use   24.0    24.0      17.0    17.0
total use   39.0    44.0      33.7    33.7
end stocks-x   24.5    19.5      26.7    26.7
note - average price in dlrs per cwt. x-broken kernels not
included - supply minus use does not equal ending stocks in
breakdowns. rice season begins august 1.
-- totals may not add due to rounding.
-- figures for 1986/87 are midpoint of usda range.
-- feed usage for corn, wheat, soybean, feedgrains,
sorghum, barley, oats includes residual amount.
-- residual amount included in rice and medium/short grain
-- rice, long grain, and medium/short grain rice average
price for 1985/86 estimates and 1986/87 projections are market
prices and exclude cash retained under the marketing loan since
forecast the soviet 1986/87 cotton crop at 11.20 mln bales
(480-lbs net), vs 11.20 mln bales forecast last month.
the department also estimated the 1985/86 soviet cotton
crop at 12.10 mln bales, vs 12.10 mln bales last month.
usda estimates south africa corn crop, exports
forecast south africa's 1986/87 corn crop at 8.50 mln tonnes,
vs 9.50 mln tonnes last month. it estimated the 1985/86 crop at
8.08 mln, vs 8.08 mln last month.
usda forecast south african 1986/87 corn exports at 2.10
mln tonnes, vs 3.00 mln tonnes last month, and 1985/86 exports
at 2.75 mln tonnes, vs 2.75 mln tonnes last month.
stop and shop cos &lt;shp> in two-for-one split
the stop and shop cos inc said its board
voted a two-for-one stock split payable july one, to
it also said it was raising its quarterly cash dividend 16
pct to 32 cts per share from 27.5 cts per share prior.
as a result of the split, the number of outstanding shares
will increase to 28 mln from 14 mln, the company said.
the dividend is payable july one to shareholders of record
national beverage to acquire faygo beverages
said it agreed to acquire &lt;faygo beverages inc> for an
faygo has revenues in excess of of 100 mln dlrs, national
audio/video affiliates &lt;ava> 4th qtr jan 31 net
shr 17 cts vs 28 cts
revs 93.9 mln vs 83.8 mln
avg shrs 15.7 mln vs 13.2 mln
shr 48 cts vs 58 cts
revs 228.8 mln vs 181.9 mln
avg shrs 15.7 mln vs 12.9 mln
note: full name of company is audio/video affiliates inc.
fluorocarbon &lt;fcbn> buys eaton &lt;etn> division
signed a definitive agreement to acquire eaton corp's
industrial polymer division for an undisclosed price.
the polymer division, based in aurora, ohio, had 1986 sales
of 86 mln dlrs, fluorocarbon also said.
first union corp &lt;func> 1st qtr net
shr 71 cts vs 61 cts
net 78.5 mln vs 64.6 mln
note: current qtr includes gain of seven cts/shr from sale
financial news network inc &lt;fnni> 2nd qtr net
shr six cts vs three cts
rev 8.3 mln vs 3.7 mln
shr 17 cts vs five cts
rev 15.0 mln vs 7.4 mln
first colonial bankshares corp &lt;fcola> 1st qtr
shr 41 cts vs 35 cts
seasonal exports reported by u.s. exporters
between start of current seasons and april 2, with comparisons,
as reported to usda by exporters, in thousand tonnes, unless
x-2,059,300 tonnes of corn and 763,800 tonnes of sorghum added
to reflect change in marketing year to sept-aug.
hawaiian electric &lt;he> to buy hawaiian insurance
has entered a letter of intent to buy the hawaiian insurance
the transaction is subject to a definitive agreement, and
the hawaiian insurance companies ad assets at the end of
1986 of 137.4 mln dlrs and earned premiums of 46.1 mln dlrs.
hawaiian electric said it plans to operate the comapny,
which has 226 employees, with current management.
soviet union to import more grain in 86/87-usda
increased its estimate of 1986/87 grain purchases by the soviet
union to 28 mln tonnes, up two mln tonnes from last month.
in its monthly report on the soviet grain situation, the
usda said imports will be higher than earlier estimated because
soviet grain buyers have been actively purchasing in the last
usda said the increased purchasing is "somewhat surprising"
because of recent higher soviet crop estimates.
all of the increase in estimated imports will be in corn,
of the 28 mln tonnes total, 15 mln tonnes will be wheat, 12
mln tonnes coarse grains, and the remaining one mln tonnes
miscellaneous grains and pulses, usda said.
usda noted that the soviet winter grain crop suffered
through a severe winter and spring field work has been delayed.
the severe winter "is believed to have resulted in above
some grain trade analysts have said abnormal winter losses
maybe one reason why the soviet union has been actively buying
usda said moscow already has purchased over 25 mln tonnes
grain for delivery in 1986/87, including 14 mln tonnes wheat
and 12 mln tonnes coarse grain.
disney family makes bid for holly sugar &lt;hly>
the roy disney family disclosed in a
filing with the securities and exchange commission that it made
a bid to acquire holly sugar corp for a package of cash and
shamrock holdings of california inc, a disney family
company, said it submitted the bid on april 8 to salomon
brothers inc, holly sugar's investment banker.
the offer was for 45 dlrs in cash, securities with a face
value of 70 dlrs, and a "contingent payment certificate" that
would pay out as much as 70 dlrs over a 20-year period for each
the disney family already holds 101,300 holly sugar shares
or 9.0 pct of the total outstanding following purchases of
12,500 shares march 13-april 17, shamrock told the sec.
shamrock said it had asked for certain information about
holly sugar's financial condition but had been turned down. it
said its offer was therefore subject to further discussions.
"once we have had an opportunity to complete our due
diligence evaluation of the company, including inspections of
certain facilities and meetings with key management personnel,
we would be prepared to negotiate all aspects of our proposal,
including price," it said in its april 8 letter.
u.s. exporters report 200,000 tonnes wheat  sold to jordan for 1987/88 delivery
u.s. exporters report 200,000 tonnes wheat  sold to jordan for 1987/88 delivery
universal health realty &lt;uht> 1st qtr net
note: company's full name is universal health realty income
trust. quarter is company's first full quarter of earnings.
frost and sullivan inc &lt;frsl> increases payout
semi-annual div seven cts vs six cts prior
c.o.m.b. co said it acquired for 8.7
mln dlrs the principal assets of national tech industries inc
the companies are engaged in servicing, sales and
rai research corp &lt;rac> 3rd qtr feb 28
shr one cts vs 14 cts
revs 1.3 mln vs 2.2 mln
shr 27 cts vs 26 cts
revs 5.6 mln vs 5.6 mln
note:1986 net includes loss of 49,040 in nine months from
discontinued and gain of 15,598 dlrs in 3rd qtr.
centel corp said it completed the
acquisition of welbac cable television corp, which serves more
than 2,500 cable television subscribers in east central
with the addition of welbac customers, centel cable
television co of michigan serves more than 83,000 customers.
overall, centel has nearly 495,000 customers in seven states.
james river corp &lt;jr> sets regular payout
qtrly div 10 cts vs 10 cts prior
three d departments inc &lt;tdd> sets payout
class a qtly div 2-1/2 cts vs 2-1/2 cts prior
class b qtly div 1-1/2 cts vs 1-1/2 cts prior
u.s. exporters report 300,000 tonnes  soybean meal to iraq for split delivery
u.s. exporters report 300,000 tonnes  soybean meal to iraq for split delivery
u.s. exporters report 100,000 tonnes corn  sold to algeria for 1986/87 delivery
u.s. exporters report 100,000 tonnes corn  sold to algeria for 1986/87 delivery
world supply/demand estimates issued by usda
the following 1986/87 projections in its world supply/demand
report, with comparisons, in mln tonnes, except where noted --
end stks  390.70    398.05    343.40    342.34
start stks  137.05   136.48   125.54   125.87
feed use    101.79   100.82    90.19    90.56
total domes 517.26   514.89   487.45   488.20
end stocks  148.99   149.99   137.05   136.48
note - world imports/exports may not balance due to differing
marketing years, grains in transit and reporting discrepancies.
start stcks 181.64  181.10    107.80  108.40
feed use    514.07  510.20    510.20  510.80
total domes 796.33  793.64    770.76  772.14
end stocks  220.52  226.28    181.64  181.10
note - world imports/exports may not balance due to differing
marketing years, grain in transit and reporting discrepancies.
start stcks 123.08  123.11     61.09   61.75
feed use    295.49  289.47    286.53  287.42
ttl domes   444.78  439.80    419.88  420.55
end stocks  155.56  163.61    123.08  123.11
note - world imports/exports may not balance due to differing
marketing years, grain in transit and reporting discrepancies.
start stcks  23.03   22.84    17.59   17.58
ttl domes    97.53   96.40    92.36   92.34
end stocks   25.23   25.71    23.03   22.84
note - imports and exports do not balance due to differing
marketing years and time lags between reported exports and
start stocks  2.55    2.47     2.79    2.74
end stocks    2.52    2.47     2.55    2.47
note - imports and exports may not balance due to differing
marketing years and time lags between reported exports and
start stocks  1.61   1.51       1.37   1.36
end stocks    1.78   1.54       1.61   1.51
note - imports and exports do not balance due to differing
marketing years and time lags between reported exports and
start stcks 45.87   48.14    42.70   43.11
mill use    80.72   77.08    76.84   74.79
end stocks  34.16   39.99    45.87   48.14
note - imports and exports may not balance due to cotton in
transit and reporting discrepancies in some countries.
start stocks 24.71   24.75     22.16   22.16
dom. use    321.41  321.87    317.58  317.46
end stocks   21.19   21.78     24.71   24.75
adams express co &lt;adx> march 31 assets
shr 22.50 dlrs vs 21.74 dlrs
assets 546.9 mln vs 485.2 mln
shrs out 24.3 mln vs 22.3 mln
note: lastest assets after capital gain distributions of 28
cts a share in february 1987 and 2.55 dlrs a share in december
petroleum and resources corp &lt;peo> march 31
shr 31.36 dlrs vs 25.23 dlrs
assets 286.5 mln vs 253.0 mln
note: latest assets after capital gain distributions of 50
cts a share in february 1987 and 83 cts a share in december
1986, and with 29,955,000 stated value 1.676 dlr convertible
corn supply/demand by country -- usda
detailed world supply/demand data for major importers and
exporters of corn, by country, as follows in mln tonnes --
start stocks  n.a.    n.a.     n.a.    n.a.
domes use    20.50   19.50    24.40   24.40
end stocks    n.a.    n.a.     n.a.    n.a.
south africa corn, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  1.20   1.20     1.87   1.87
domes use    6.10   6.20     6.00   6.00
end stocks   1.50   1.50     1.20   1.20
ec-12 corn, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  5.17    5.28      2.89    2.89
domes use   28.20   29.00     29.46   29.60
end stocks   4.75    3.98      5.17    5.28
argentina corn, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.52   0.39       0.39   0.39
domes use    4.60   4.60       4.60   4.60
end stocks   0.22   0.29       0.52   0.39
thailand corn, in mln tonnes --
start stocks 0.43   0.33      0.11   0.11
domestic use 1.55   1.35      1.35   1.25
end stocks   0.18   0.08      0.43   0.33
japan corn, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  1.24   1.24       1.06   1.06
domes use   15.51  15.45      14.37  14.37
end stocks   1.24   1.24       1.24   1.24
private u.s. exporters reported sales of 200,000 tonnes of
wheat to jordan, 300,000 tonnes of soybean meal to iraq and
100,000 tonnes of corn to algeria.
the wheat for jordan includes 165,000 tonnes of hard red
winter and 35,000 tonnes of soft red winter and is for delivery
the soybean meal sales to iraq includes 180,000 tonnes for
delivery during the 1986/87 season and 120,000 tonnes during
the 1987/88 season, the department said.
the 100,000 tonnes of corn sales to algeria are for
delivery during the 1986/87 season, it said.
the marketing year for wheat begins june 1, corn september
1, and soybean meal october 1.
international american &lt;home> to acquire cos
said it entered into a conditional contract to acquire the
&lt;maione-hirschberg cos inc> and affiliated entitles for 19 mln
international american, whose stock was halted on nasdaq
earlier, said the purchase price is payable 12 mln dlrs in cash
and the balance in its own common shares.
selling shareholders may earn an additional amount up to a
maximum of eight mln dlrs payable in cash based on the future
performance of the companies acquired during the three years
ending march 31, 1990, international said.
the acquisition is subject to certain conditions, such as
satisfactory results of due diligence investigations, the
sony chairman forecasts lower profits this year
morita said sony's profits would be sharply down in 1987 as a
sony corp posted net consolidated income of 41.89 billion
yen (290 million dollars) in 1986, 42.6 pct down on 1985's
73.02 billion yen (506 million dollars).
but morita added that japan would benefit from the strong
yen by saving on its energy import bill and he expected profits
he was speaking to reporters at a sony factory opening
coarse grain supply/demand by country -- usda
detailed world supply/demand data for major importers and
exporters of coarse grains, by country, as follows in mln
start stcks  n.a.    n.a.      n.a.    n.a.
domes use  112.30  112.30    111.99  111.99
end stocks   n.a.    n.a.      n.a.    n.a.
ec-12 coarse grain, in mln tonnes --
start stcks 14.91   14.93    10.53   10.53
dom use     79.64   81.27    82.38   82.55
end stocks  13.18   12.15    14.91   14.93
eastern europe coarse grain, mln tonnes --
start stcks  4.07    3.72     5.14    5.14
dom use     73.04   73.23    72.65   72.77
end stocks   6.34    5.46     4.07    3.72
japan coarse grain, in mln tonnes --
start stcks 2.32    2.23     1.91    1.91
dom use    21.79   21.73    21.49   21.49
end stocks  2.44    2.44     2.32    2.32
argentina coarse grain, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.78    0.53     0.83    0.83
domes use    7.73    7.75     7.76    7.87
end stocks   0.46    0.49     0.78    0.53
canada coarse grain, in mln tonnes --
start stcks 6.19    6.19     4.66    4.61
dom use    19.80   19.80    18.99   18.96
end stocks  6.90    7.10     6.19    6.19
thailand coarse grains, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.49    0.38     0.16   0.16
domes use    1.57    1.37     1.40   1.30
end stocks   0.22    0.11     0.49   0.38
export bonus wheat for jordan --usda
(ccc) accepted eight bonus offers from two exporters on sales
of 190,000 tonnes of hard red winter and 35,000 tonnes of soft
red winter wheat to jordan, the u.s. agriculture department
the department said the bonuses awarded averaged 38.08 dlrs
per tonne and the wheat is for delivery may-november, 1987.
the bonus awards were made to louis dreyfus corp (200,000
tonnes), and continental grain co (25,000 tonnes) and will be
paid in the form of commodities from ccc stocks.
the purchases of u.s. wheat completes the export
enhancement program initiative announced on december 31, 1986.
figures show 1986/87 crop export registrations of grains and
oilseeds in the week to april 8, were as follows, in tonnes,
compared with the previous week and the comparable week a year
cumulative figures export registrations for the 1986/87
crop to april 8, 1987, with comparative figures for the 1985/86
crop up to april 9, 1986, in brackets, were in thousands of
winn enterprises &lt;wnn> unit sells dairy
said it entered an agreement to sell its hawaiian dairy
operations to foremost foods inc for 13 mln dlrs cash.
the company said the purchase price is subject to
adjustment and the entire transaction is subject to approval by
the u.s. bankruptcy court for the central district of
said it agreed to acquire privately held faygo beverages inc
for an undisclosed amount of cash.
the company said detroit-based faygo, a soft drink maker,
has annual revenues of more than 100 mln dlrs.
national beverage, which is also privately held, owns and
bottles shasta beverages, spree all natural beverages and
private label brands in its 11 bottling facilities in the
soybean supply/demand by country -- usda
detailed world supply/demand data for major importers and
exporters of soybeans, by country, as follows in mln tonnes --
start stocks  4.19    4.01     4.71    4.71
domestic use 14.54   14.54    13.51   13.49
end stocks    4.50    4.32     4.19    4.01
argentina soybeans, in mln tonnes --
start stocks  1.83    1.83     1.80    1.80
domestic use  4.97    4.97     4.74    4.74
end stocks    1.91    1.91     1.83    1.83
ec-12 soybeans, in mln tonnes --
start stocks  0.51   0.52       0.66   0.66
domestic use 13.72  13.68      13.34  13.30
end stocks    0.40   0.41       0.51   0.52
japan soybeans, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.76   0.76      0.79   0.79
domes use    5.10   5.10      5.06   5.06
end stocks   0.75   0.75      0.76   0.76
soybean meal supply/demand by country -- usda
detailed world supply/demand data for major importers and
exporters of soybean meal, by country, as follows in mln tonnes
start stcks  0.13   0.13      0.19   0.19
domes use    0.35   0.35      0.35   0.35
end stocks   0.15   0.15      0.13   0.13
brazil soybean meal, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.61   0.60      0.72   0.72
domes use    2.55   2.55      2.41   2.40
end stocks   0.61   0.59      0.61   0.60
ec-12 soybean meal, in mln tonnes --
start stcks   0.40   0.40       0.44   0.44
domes use    18.50  18.49      18.59  18.57
end stocks    0.30   0.30       0.40   0.40
soybean oil supply/demand by country -- usda
detailed world supply/demand data for major importers and
exporters of soybean oil, by country, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.10   0.10      0.10   0.10
domes use    0.10   0.10      0.11   0.11
end stocks   0.10   0.10      0.10   0.10
brazil soybean oil, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.32   0.28      0.24   0.24
domes use    2.00   2.00      1.94   1.98
end stocks   0.34   0.28      0.32   0.28
ec-12 soybean oil, in mln tonnes --
start stcks  0.22   0.22      0.23   0.22
domes use    1.46   1.45      1.38   1.38
end stocks   0.23   0.23      0.22   0.22
start stcks  0.12   0.07      0.21   0.21
domes use    0.52   0.52      0.49   0.54
end stocks   0.12   0.07      0.12   0.07
royal dutch (rd) unit to raise heavy fuel prices
scallop petroleum corp, a subsidiary of
royal dutch/shell group, said it will raise contract prices for
heavy fuel 50 cts to one dlr a barrel, effective tomorrow.
the increase brings the price for 0.5 pct sulphur fuel to
21.50 dlrs, up 50 cts, 0.7 pct sulphur to 21 dlrs, up 75 cts,
0.7 pct sulphur to 21 dlrs, up 75 cts, one pct sulphur to 20.25
dlrs, up 75 cts, two pct sulphur to 19.75 dlrs, up one dlr, 2.2
pct sulphur to 19.50 dlrs, up one dlr, 2.8 pct sulphur 19 dlrs,
up one dlr, the company said.
price for 0.3 pct sulphur was unchanged at 22.25 dlrs, it
cotton supply/demand by country -- usda
detailed world supply/demand data for major importers and
exporters of cotton, by country, as follows, in mln 480-lb
start stcks 16.00  18.30      19.40  19.80
domes use   21.00  17.50      19.50  17.50
end stocks   9.05  14.55      16.00  18.30
x - less than 5,000 bales
pakistan cotton, in mln 480 bales --
start stocks 1.07   1.07      1.05   1.05
domestic use 2.50   2.50      2.34   2.34
end stocks   1.51   1.51      1.07   1.07
x - less than 5,000 bales.
ussr cotton, in mln 480-lbs bales --
start stocks  2.76   2.76       2.62   2.62
domestic use  9.70   9.70       9.60   9.60
end stocks    2.46   2.46       2.76   2.76
japan cotton, in mln 480-lbs bales --
start stocks  0.52   0.52      0.61   0.61
domestic use  3.10   3.10      3.15   3.15
end stocks    0.52   0.52      0.52   0.52
export bonus wheat flour to iraq --usda
(ccc) accepted a bid for an export bonus to cover a sale of
12,500 tonnes of u.s. wheat flour to iraq, the u.s. agriculture
the department said the bonus awarded was 105.82 dlrs per
tonne and the wheat flour is for shipment july 1-10, 1987.
the bonus was awarded to the pillsbury company and will be
paid in the form of commodities from ccc stocks.
an additional 150,000 tonnes of wheat flour is still
available to iraq under the export enhancement program
initiative announced january 7, 1987, the department said.
rice supply/demand for thailand -- usda
detailed rice supply/demand milled-basis data for thailand, the
world's major rice exporter, as follows in mln tonnes --
start stcks  1.32   1.33       1.46   1.46
domes use    8.73   8.73       8.80   8.80
end stocks   0.77   1.04       1.32   1.33
usda florida orange report considered bearish
latest estimates on 1986/87 florida orange production and
orange juice yield are bearish for the frozen concentrated
orange juice futures market because the yield increase was
greater than expected, fcoj traders and analysts said.
the usda projected an average yield of 1.50 gallons of fcoj
per box versus last month's estimate of 1.47 gallons.
the government estimated florida orange production
(excluding temples) at 122.9 mln boxes versus 124 mln last
month. temples were unchanged at 3.4 mln boxes.
traders and analysts said the unexpectedly large yield
increase outweighed the anticipated drop in box count.
james river corp &lt;jr> sets regular dividend
qtly div 10 cts vs 10 cts prior
noranda begins salvage operations at murdochville
&lt;noranda inc> said it began salvage
operations at its murdochville, quebec, mine, where a fire last
week killed one miner and caused 10 mln dlrs in damage.
another 56 miners were trapped underground for as long as
24 hours before they were brought to safety.
noranda said the cause and full extent of the damage is
still unknown but said it does know that the fire destroyed
noranda said work crews have begun securing the ramp
leading into the zone where the fire was located. the company
said extreme heat from the fire caused severe rock degradation
along several ramps and drifts in the mine.
noranda estimated that the securing operation for the zone
will not be completed before the end of april.
noranda said the quebec health and safety commission, the
quebec provincial police and noranda itself are each conducting
production at the mine has been suspended until the
investigations are complete. the copper mine and smelter
produced 72,000 tons of copper anodes in 1986 and employs 680
the smelter continues to operate with available
concentrate from stockpiled supplies, noranda said. reuter
shr 10 cts vs 10 cts prior qtr
shr 15 cts vs 15 cts prior qtr
westinghouse electric corp 1st qtr shr 1.05 dlrs vs 88 cts
westinghouse electric corp 1st qtr shr 1.05 dlrs vs 88 cts
u.s. oil dependency seen rising to record level
foreign oil sources may reach record levels by the mid-1990s,
according to john h. lichtblau, president of petroleum industry
lichtblau, speaking at an alternative energy conference
here, said the u.s. may depend on foreign suppliers for as much
as 52 pct of its oil by 1995, surpasssing the previous high
level of 47 pct in 1977.
"the long term growth in dependency on foreign oil is
inevitable," lichtblau said. as much as 30 pct of u.s. oil
imports in 1995 could come from opec nations, he said.
lichtblau said the u.s. depended on foreign suppliers for
33 pct of its oil in 1986 and predicted that would increase to
"however, the rate of this growth can be affected
positively or negatively through government action or
he said that one of the government's negative actions is
the maintenance of the windfall profits tax which acts as a
disincentive to developing existing fields and reduces cash
lichtblau called for the adoption of an international floor
price for crude oil to help stabilize world oil prices.
"an international floor price adopted by all or most
industrial countries would clearly be a much more effective
measure and would be much less distortive for the u.s. than if
we imposed it alone," lichtblau said.
development of alternate energy sources such as synthetic
fuels as well as increased development in alaska could lessen
u.s. dependency on foreign oil, lichtblau said.
a potential for alternative supplies could limit the
willingness of opec nations to raise oil prices, he said.
lichtblau also called for the federal government to offer
tax abatements for oil drilling, to fill the strategic
petroleum reserve at a faster rate and to develop pilot plans
there were six grain ships loading and
eight ships were waiting to load at portland, according to the
westinghouse electric corp &lt;wx> 1st qtr net
shr primary 1.05 dlrs vs 88 cts
shr dilulted 1.05 dlrs vs 86 cts
net 151.6 mln vs 135.2 mln
revs 2.32 billion vs 2.55 billion
avg shrs 144.6 mln vs 154.5 mln
ccc guarantees to iraq switched --usda
(ccc) has transferred 12.0 mln dlrs in credit guarantees
previously earmarked for sales of u.s. hatching eggs and 7.0
mln dlrs in guarantees for breeder livestock to increase
coverage on sales of u.s. protein concentrates to iraq, the
the action was taken at the request of iraq's state trade
organization for grains and foodstuffs and reduces the line for
hatching eggs to zero and the line for breeder livestock from
15.0 mln dlrs to 8.0 mln dlrs, the department said.
the guarantee line for sales of protein concentrates has
been increased from 25.0 mln dlrs to 44.0 mln dlrs, it said.
new york business loans fall 1.31 billion dlrs
commercial and industrial loans on the
books of the 10 major new york banks, excluding acceptances,
fell 1.31 billion dlrs to 62.70 billion in the week ended april
1, the federal reserve bank of new york said.
including acceptances, loans dropped 1.34 billion dlrs to
commercial paper outstanding nationally fell 4.80 billion
national business loan data are scheduled to be released on
n.y. bank discount borrowings 169 mln dlrs
the eight major new york city banks had
daily average borrowings of 169 mln dlrs from the federal
reserve in the week ended april 8, a fed spokesman said.
a fed spokesman said that all of the borrowings were made
yesterday by fewer than half the banks.
it was the second half of the two-week bank statement
period that ended on wednesday. average borrowings by these
banks were 142 mln dlrs in the first week of the period.
national average prices for farmer-owned reserve
reported the farmer-owned reserve national five-day average
price through april 8 as follows (dlrs/bu-sorghum cwt) -
wheat   2.62   2.40       iv     4.65     --
corn    1.38   1.92       iv     3.15   3.15
oats     1.58   0.99        v    1.65    --
barley   1.55   1.56       iv    2.55   2.55
sorghum  2.54   3.25-y     iv    5.36   5.36
reserves i, ii and iii have matured. level iv reflects
grain entered after oct 6, 1981 for feedgrain and after july
23, 1981 for wheat. level v wheat/barley after 5/14/82,
corn/sorghum after 7/1/82. level vi covers wheat entered after
january 19, 1984.  x-1986 rates. y-dlrs per cwt (100 lbs).
u.s. weekly soybean crush 19,416,000 bushels
soybean processors association (nspa) crushed 19,416,000
bushels of soybeans in the week ended april 8 compared with
20,115,000 bushels in the previous week and 17,160,000 in the
it said total crushing capacity for members was 25,873,904
bushels vs 25,873,904 last week and 25,459,238 bushels last
nspa also said u.s. soybean meal exports in the week were
70,351 tonnes vs 135,452 tonnes a week ago and compared with
76,065 tonnes in the year-ago week.
nspa said the figures include only nspa member firms.
nspa gave the following breakdown of the soybean crush for
the week, with comparisons, in 1,000 bu:
ind, ky, ohio   3,586    3,376    6,053-y
minn, n.d., s.d.   1,875    1,651    1,488
x-ill not reported exclusive of ind, ky and ohio in year-ago
fundamental brokers buys part of mki brokers
associates, a leading inter-dealer broker in u.s. government
securities, said it has agreed to acquire certain assets of mki
government brokers inc for undisclosed terms.
acquisition documents have been signed and are being held
in escrow pending the receipt of certain consents, it said.
in conjunction with the sale of assets, mki has ceased
brokering treasury bills, notes and bonds, fundamental said.
industry sources told reuters yesterday that fundamental
was close to acquiring the government securities brokerage
division of mki, a major broker of corporate bonds.
fundamental said it intends to use the facilities formerly
used by mki to provide a new block brokering service in the
by separating the execution of wholesale trades from the
heavy volume of smaller lots, large-scale transactions will be
"the new system is expected to substantially enhance the
liquidity and effiency of markets," fundamental said.
the wholesale brokering service will begin on or around
newhall investment &lt;nip> sets special payout
said it declared a special distribution of 50 cts per share,
payable june one, to unitholders of record april 24.
fcoj movement 4,496,533 gallons last week
association said frozen concentrated orange juice movement into
trade channels in the week ended april 4 totalled 4,496,533
gallons versus 5,058,976 gallons in the week ended march 28 and
4,141,578 gallons in the corresponding year-ago period.
there were 499,967 gallons of foreign imports last week
versus 341,280 gallons the week before. domestic imports last
week were 24,774. retail movement was 1,741,139 versus
1,464,490 a year ago. bulk movement was 2,328,368 against
current season cumulative movement was 79,516,753 gallons
versus 76,919,119 last year. cumulative net pack for the season
was 86,254,846 versus 82,355,864 a year ago. inventory was
75,212,711 versus 75,985,696 a year ago.
national heritage &lt;nher> buys management firm
national heritage inc said it acquired
the assets of chartham management corp of salem, ore.
the assets acquired will be used to form a new divisional
office serving the northwest, the nursing home operator said.
the newly acquired salem operation has management
responsibility for about 2,500 beds in 28 nursing homes in
southmark corp &lt;sm>, which owns 80 pct of national
heritage, recently agreed to acquire the 28 facilities.
national is the manager of nursing home properties owned by
ohio mattress &lt;omt> buys sealy of michigan
ohio mattress co said that its
ohio-sealy mattress manufacturing co unit completed its
previously announced acquisition of sealy mattress co of
in addition, the company said sealy inc, of which its owns
82 pct, redeemed the outstanding sealy stock held by michigan
sealy, thus increasing the company's stake in sealy to 93 pct.
la land &lt;llx>,du pont &lt;dd>get exploration tracts
said it, du pont co's conoco inc subsidiary and &lt;oranje-nassau
energie b.v.> have been offered four exploration blocks
louisiana land said blocks q4a, e12c and e15b were offered
to the group in which conoco has a 67.5 pct interest, louisiana
land 20 pct and orange-nassau 12.5 pct, while this group along
with a consortium headed by pennzoil co &lt;pzl> were offered
block q5c. the offers were the result of applications submitted
to the ministry of economic affairs for the netherlands sixth
louisiana land said the conoco group intends to provide a
formal acceptance of the blocks with plans to start exploration
the company also said the two q blocks immediately offset
other offshore blocks on which hydrocarbons have been found in
retained an investment banking firm to consider alternatives in
restructuring its long-term debt, including a possible exchange
offer for 20 mln dlrs of outstanding convertible debentures.
on april one, it began consolidating sales, marketing and
manufacturing operations. the consolidation is expected to be
complete by june one and the company said it is now focusing on
the company said the first quarter will be adversely
for the year ago first quarter, the company reported a
profit of 100,000 dlrs on 7.3 mln dlrs.
the company further said that the second quarter will be
transitional period and that earnings growth will resume in the
for the year ended december 31, 1986, patient reported a
net loss of 1.4 mln dlrs on sales of 29.8 mln dlrs, due to
write-offs from discontinued operations and a temporary backlog
napco &lt;npco> management cannot raise funding
has suspended its plan to sell its international business to a
group of that business' top managers because the group has
the company also said it still intends to pursue a new
corporate direction, and is exploring acquisition alternatives.
banks of mid-america inc &lt;boma> 1st qtr net
shr loss 18 cts vs loss 89 cts
net profit 161,000 vs loss 5,938,000
assets 3.43 billion vs 3.46 billion
deposits 2.68 billion vs 2.67 billion
loans 1.45 billion vs 1.64 billion
note: shr data after payment of preferred dividends.
mcdonnell douglas &lt;md> buys computer firm
acquired frampton computer services ltd, a british software
company that is also known as isis.
terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.
based in bristol, england, isis employs 65 workers and has
annual revenues of about five mln dlrs, mcdonnell douglas said.
the company added that isis will operate as part of
world market price for upland cotton - usda
announced the prevailing world market price, adjusted to u.s.
quality and location, for strict low middling, 1-1/16 inch
upland cotton at 50.57 cts per lb, to be in effect through
the adjusted world price is at average u.s. producing
locations (near lubbock, texas) and will be further adjusted
for other qualities and locations. the price will be used in
determining first handler cotton certificate payment rates.
the department said since the adjusted world price is above
the loan repayment rate of 44 cts per lb for the base quality,
no first handler cotton certificates will be issued during the
based on data for the week ended april 9, the adjusted
world price for upland cotton is determined as follows, in cts
average u.s. spot mkt location --  9.98
slm 1-1/16 inch cotton --  1.80
usda comments on export sales report
u.s. corn sales of just over 1.0 mln
tonnes in the week ended april 2 were eight pct above the prior
week, but 25 pct below the four-week average, the u.s.
in comments on its latest export sales report, the
department said iraq, japan and the ussr were the largest
sales for the next marketing year, which begins september
1, totaled 503,200 tonnes and were mainly to iraq and taiwan.
wheat sales of 119,300 tonnes for the current season and
net reductions of 13,700 tonnes for the 1987/88 season were
four-fifths below the combined total for the prior week and the
sri lanka was the most active wheat destination with
purchases of 52,500 tonnes for the current year, it said.
other significant purchasers for the current year were
soybean sales of 240,500 tonnes were one-fifth below the
prior week and nearly one-third below the four-week average.
japan, mexico, south korea, italy and israel were the major
net sales of 117,700 tonnes of soybean cake and meal fell
31 pct from the previous week and 38 pct below the four-week
average. major increases for west germany, venezuela, the
netherlands and saudi arabia were partially offset by
reductions for unknown destinations, usda said.
activity in soybean oil resulted in decreases of 2,400
tonnes, with sales to unknown destinations down by 2,700
tonnes, while sales to canada increased 200 tonnes, the
combined sales of 71,300 running bales of cotton -- 60,200
bales for the current season and 11,100 bales for 1987/88
season -- were four-fifths higher than the prior week's level
but nine pct below the four-week average.
mexico was the dominant buyer for the current year followed
by zaire, italy, and spain, the department said.
the primary buyers for the 1987/88 season were south korea,
spain, japan and taiwan, the department said.
sorghum sales of 143,300 tonnes were 25 pct less than the
prior week, with japan and venezuela the main buyers.
u.s. m-1 money supply falls two billion dlrs in march 30 week, fed says
u.s. m-1 money supply falls two billion dlrs in march 30 week, fed says
fed says u.s. discount window borrowings 361 mln dlrs in april 8 week
fed says u.s. discount window borrowings 361 mln dlrs in april 8 week
u.s. bank net free reserves 447 mln dlrs in two weeks to april 8
u.s. bank net free reserves 447 mln dlrs in two weeks to april 8
westinghouse electric &lt;wx> optimistic for year
douglas danforth said he was encouraged by first quarter
results for fiscal 1987, and said the company was positioned to
capitalize on the economy's modest growth for the rest of the
"i am encouraged by the continuing improvement in
earnings," danworth said. "the first quarter met our
westinghouse recorded net income for the first quarter of
151.6 mln dlrs, or 1.05 dlrs per share, on revenues of 2.32
danworth attributed the results to an increase in the
operating profit in the energy and advanced technology,
bsd bancorp &lt;bsd> 1st qtr net
shr seven cts vs five cts
loans 264.5 mln vs 251.7 mln
deposits 319.7 mln vs 306.8 mln
assets 348.6 mln vs 334.6 mln
gateway communications inc &lt;gway> 1st qtr net
shr 14 cts vs six cts
baker communications inc &lt;bakr> year loss
shr loss 42 cts vs loss 56 cts
net loss 596,354 vs loss 795,009
eastover corp &lt;easts> 4th qtr net
shr 39 cts vs 28 cts
shr 1.54 dlrs vs 2.49 dlrs
note: net includes state tax credit of 400,000 for 1986 qtr
and year. net also includes gains from sale of real estate of
3,000 vs 83,000 for qtr and 563,000 vs 1,317,000 for year.
u.s. bank discount borrowings 361 mln dlrs
less extended credits averaged 361 mln dlrs a day in the week
to wednesday, april 8, the federal reserve said.
total daily borrowings in the week fell 99 mln dlrs to 591
mln dlrs, with extended credits down 35 mln dlrs at 230 mln
dlrs. the week was the second half of the two-week statement
period that ended wednesday. net borrowings averaged 425 mln
dlrs in the first week of the period.
commenting on the two-week statement period that ended on
april 8, the fed said banks had average net free reserves of
a fed spokesman told a press conference that there were no
large one-day net misses in the fed's estimates of reserves in
of the week's borrowings, money center banks accounted for
65 pct, and small banks for almost 35 pct. on wednesday, when
net borrowings were 1.36 billion dlrs and fed funds averaged a
high 6.45 pct, money center banks accounted for more than 90
borrowings in the latest two weeks averaged 393 mln dlrs a
day, the highest since the statement period ended january 28.
float ranged from about 250 mln dlrs on thursday to between
one and 1.25 billion dlrs on monday and tuesday.
the spokesman said monday's float included 500 mln dlrs in
holdover float at one fed branch due to mechanical problems.
about 500 mln dlrs of tuesday's float reflected
non-weather-related transportation float in one eastern reserve
as-of adjustments ranged from minus 500 mln dlrs on monday,
when cash letter errors at two eastern reserve banks were
corrected, to plus 500 mln dlrs on thursday, when a correction
was made to unposted funds at a single bank.
in the first half of the statement period ended wednesday,
banks held excess reserves on the first four days of the week
but ran a deficit on wednesday.
in the second week, they ran a deficit on thursday, friday
and monday but held excess reserves on the final two days.
noranda inc said it began salvage
operations at its murdochville, quebec mine where a fire last
week killed one miner and caused 10 mln dlrs in damage.
noranda said the cause and full extent of the damage is
still unknown but the fire destroyed 6,000 feet of conveyor
the company said extreme heat from the fire caused severe
rock degradation along several ramps and drifts in the mine.
production at the mine has been suspended until
investigations are complete. the copper mine and smelter
produced 72,000 tons of copper anodes in 1986.
the smelter continues to operate with available
concentrate from stockpiled supplies, noranda said.
u.s. m-1 money supply falls two billion dlrs
u.s. m-1 money supply fell two billion
dlrs to a seasonally adjusted 738.9 billion dlrs in the march
30 week, the federal reserve said.
the previous week's m-1 level was revised to 740.9 billion
dlrs from 741.0 billion, while the four-week moving average of
m-1 rose to 739.8 billion dlrs from 739.7 billion.
economists polled by reuters said that m-1 would be
anywhere from down two billion dlrs to up 1.8 billion.
been seeking to be acquired, said it recently received
inquiries concerning the purchase of the company.
the company did not identify the parties that made the
inquiries, but it said they had been referred to its investment
bankers, tucker, anthony and r.l. day inc, for study.
on march 18, the company said it engaged tucker, anthony to
seek purchasers of its operating units, greenville tube corp
jacor &lt;jcor> to buy two denver radio stations
agreed to buy two denver radio stations from a.h. belo corp
&lt;blc> for 24 mln dlrs in cash and notes.
jacor said the two stations are koa-am and koaq-fm.
the acquisitions must be approved by the federal
assets of u.s. money funds rose in week
assets of money market mutual funds
increased 1.39 billion dlrs in the week ended yesterday to
236.77 billion dlrs, the investment company institute said.
assets of 93 institutional funds were up 481.1 mln dlrs to
65.65 billion dlrs, 93 broker-dealer funds rose 285.3 mln dlrs
to 107.31 billion dlrs, and 197 general purpose funds gained
625.5 mln dlrs to 63.8 billion dlrs.
polycast &lt;ptcc> reduces spartech &lt;sptn> stake
securities and exchange commission it sold off 119,800 of its
spartech corp common shares, reducing its stake in spartech to
30,000 shares or 1.2 pct of the total outstanding.
polycast said it made the sales april 6-8 in the
it gave no reason for the sales.
grain shipments to the ussr -- usda
there were 287,700 tonnes of u.s.
corn shipped to the soviet union in the week ended april 2,
according to the u.s. agriculture department's latest export
that compares with 106,200 tonnes shipped in the prior
there were no wheat or soybean shipments during the week.
the ussr has purchased 2,825,600 tonnes of u.s. corn, as of
april 2, for delivery in the fourth year of the u.s.-ussr grain
total shipments in the third year of the u.s.-ussr grains
agreement, which ended september 30, amounted to 152,600 tonnes
of wheat, 6,808,100 tonnes of corn and 1,518,700 tonnes of
hospital corp says it received 47 dlr a share offer from investor group
hospital corp says it received 47 dlr a share offer from investor group
beverly enterprises &lt;bev> sets regular dividend
qtly div five cts vs five cts prior
treasury's baker says floating exchange rate system needs greater stability
treasury's baker says floating exchange rate system needs greater stability
crude oil netbacks up sharply in europe, u.s.
crude oil netback values in complex
refineries rose sharply in europe and firmed in the u.s. last
friday from the previous week but fell sharply in singapore,
according to calculations by reuters pipeline.
the firmer tone to refining margins in europe and the u.s.
relected higher prices for petroleum products, particularly
gasoline, and support from crude oil prices.
netback values for crude oil refined in northern europe
rose substantially following strong gains in gasoline prices
there. brent is valued at 19.45 dlrs, up 56 cts a barrel or
three pct from the previous week.
in the u.s. gulf, sweet crudes rose in value by 14 cts to
19.33 dlrs for west texas intermediate, up about 0.7 pct.
sour grades in the u.s. gulf showed an increase of 33 cts a
barrel for alaska north slope, up 1.7 pct.
but netbacks for crude oil refined in singapore fell
sharply, down 15 cts to as much as 68 cts a barrel as ample
distillate supplies weighed on petroleum product prices.
attaka in singapore is valued at 18.55 dlrs, a decline of
68 cts a barrel or 3.5 pct from the previous week.
for refineries in the mediterranean, netback values were
mostly lower, with declines of seven to 14 cts. the value of
kuwait crude fell 14 cts to 18.37 dlrs, while iranian light
fell 11 cts to 19.14 dlrs.
on the u.s. west coast, netback values for ans cif l.a.
also jumped sharply, up 40 cts a barrel or 2.2 pct to 18.82
treasury's baker says system needs stability
the floating exchange rate system has not been as effective as
had been hoped in promoting stability and preventing imbalances
from emerging in the global economy.
in remarks before the afternoon session of the
international monetary fund's interim committee, baker said he
was not suggesting that the system should be abandoned.
"but i do suggest," he said, "that we need something to give
it more stability and to keep it headed in the right direction
he said that indicators can serve "as a kind of compass" but
added that structural indicators can help focus attention on
baker, however, said the imf "needs to move beyond
macroeconomic indicators and find structural indicators that
can help focus attention on some of the policies of specific
relevance to the imbalances we face today."
the treasury secretary said that indicators should be given
a more prominent role in the annual economic reviews -- article
iv consultations -- that the fund performs.
baker also told the policy making group that it was time
for the imf to adopt earlier recommendations making imf
surveillance more relevant to national policymakers and the
"in particular, we urge increased publicity for imf
appraisals developed in article iv consultations, the use of
follow-up reports on country actions to implement imf
recommendations, and greater use of special consultation
baker emphasized that indicators were a device "for moving
he said they provide "more structure to the system, and
induce more discipline and peer pressure into the process of
he said the fund's procedures for surveillance need to be
reviewed and updated to reflect the use of indicators.
"this should be matter of priority for the executive board,"
baker also urged the fund to develop alternative
medium-term economic scenarios for countries that "can help us
focus even more clearly on the most important imbalances, by
identifying options for addressing them and analyzing the
he said also that further work should be done on finding
paths that lead toward possible medium-term objectives.
"if we are to take effective remedial action when there are
significant deviations from an intended course, then we must
have more definitive ways of indentifying the right course for
nerci &lt;ner> unit closes oil/gas acquisition
nerco inc said its oil and gas
unit closed the acquisition of a 47 pct working interest in the
broussard oil and gas field from &lt;davis oil co> for about 22.5
nerco said it estimates the field's total proved developed
and undeveloped reserves at 24 billion cubic feet, or
equivalent, of natural gas, which more than doubles the
the field is located in southern louisiana.
u.s. dollar losses propel broad commodity gains
commodities from gold to grains to
cotton posted solid gains in a flurry of buying today as losses
in the u.s. dollar and rising interest rates kindled fears of
gains were most pronounced on the commodity exchange in new
york, where gold jumped 12.40 dlrs and closed at 436.50 dlrs a
troy ounce, and silver 22.5 cents to 6.86 dlrs a troy ounce.
a key factor behind the advance was anticipation that
inflation will be the only way for the major industrial nations
to halt the slide in the value of the u.s. dollar, said steve
chronowitz, director of commodity research with smith barney,
harris upham and co., in new york.
the dollar tumbled one day after top finance officials from
the seven largest industrial nations reaffirmed their
commitment to support its value, and despite reports of
intervention by the u.s. federal reserve bank, traders said.
traders said it appears that the industrial nations, known
as the group of seven, lack the ability to change the long-term
"maybe they have some ideas or plans," said chronowitz. "if
"it looks like there's no cure but to let the free market
take values to where they should be.
"one way or another, we will force our major trading
partners to stimulate their economies," as a measure to correct
the mounting u.s. trade deficit, chronowitz said.
"i think the markets believe, and have believed for a long
time, that the only recourse is to reflate at some point. it's
going to be a long and tedious process, but that's what's
the falling value of the dollar makes u.s. commodities
cheaper for foreign buyers, stimulating demand.
at the same time, traders who are holding stocks and bonds
saw the value of their investments falling and many are turning
to commodities such as precious metals as a hedge, said marty
mcneill, a metals analyst in new york with the trading house of
the reaction in the metal markets reverberated throughout
the commodities markets, as grains, livestock, and cotton
traders at the chicago board of trade said attention in the
grain markets has shifted from concern about burdensome
supplies to the outlook that a lower dollar will stimulate
after the close of trading, the agriculture department
raised its estimate for grain imports by the soviet union by
two mln tonnes from the month-earlier report.
live hogs and frozen pork bellies posted sharp gains on the
chicago mercantile exchange, while live cattle were moderately
analysts said several factors boosted hog prices. they said
hogs haven't been making the weight gains that are normal at
this time of year, and farmers have been too busy with field
egypt seeking 500,000 tonnes corn - u.s. traders
egypt is expected to tender april 22
for 500,000 tonnes of corn for may through september shipments,
trustcorp inc &lt;ttco> 1st qtr net
shr 67 cts vs 62 cts
assets 4.5 billion vs four billion
note: shr and net data are before accounting change
announced in 1986, which added 30 cts a share to year-ago 1st
napa valley bancorp &lt;nvbc> 1st qtr net
shr 20 cts vs 25 cts
international power machines &lt;pwr> 4th qtr loss
shr loss 21 cts vs loss 28 cts
net loss 817,000 vs loss 1,058,000
shr loss 75 cts vs loss 1.36 dlrs
net loss 2,872,000 vs loss 5,200,000
revs 23.3 mln vs 21.1 mln
note: 1985 net includes 1,255,000 adjustment in inventory
valuations and 486,000 in cost-reduction expenses.
full name is international power machines corp.
great american mgmt&lt;gami> has atcor&lt;atco> stake
investment inc told the securities and exchange commission it
acquired a 7.7 pct stake in atcor inc.
great american said it bought the stake for investment.
it added that it has also considered--but not yet
decided--to buy additional atcor shares, either in the open
market, in private transactions, through a tender offer or
great american said it paid about 6.1 mln dlrs for its
462,400 atcor shares. it said its most recent purchases
included 191,400 shares bought march 18-april 6.
rai research corp &lt;rac> 3rd qtr feb 28 net
oper shr one ct vs 13 cts
oper shr 27 cts cs 28 cts
note: oper excludes gain from discontinued operations of
15,598 for year-ago qtr and loss from discontinued operations
of 49,040 for year-ago nine mths.
moore &lt;mcl> sees substantial 1987 profit gain
moore corp ltd expects 1987 profits from
continuing operations will exceed 1986 results and recover to
1985 levels when the company earned 152 mln u.s. dlrs or 1.70
dlrs a share, president m. keith goodrich said.
"we'll have a substantial increase in earnings from
continuing operations," he told reporters after the annual
meeting. he said he expected profits would recover last year's
lost ground and reach 1985 results.
in 1986, profits from continuing operations slumped to
139.5 mln dlrs or 1.54 dlrs a share. the total excluded losses
of 30 mln dlrs on discontinued operations.
goodrich said moore is still actively looking for
acquisitions related to its core areas of business forms
"we could do a large acquisition," he said when asked if
the company could raise as much as one billion dlrs for this
chairman judson sinclair, answering a shareholder's
question, told the annual meeting that a special resolution
passed by shareholders to create a new class of preferred
shares would allow moore to move quickly if it decided to
"if we were to make a major acquisition ... it means we can
move with a certain expediency," sinclair said.
asked if the resolution was designed to give moore
protection from a possible hostile takeover, sinclair said
only, "i know of no threat to the corporation at this time."
firm has 14.8 pct of decision/capital fund&lt;dcf>
gabelli group inc said it and two
subsidiaries held a total of 295,800 decision/capital fund inc
shares or 14.8 pct of the total outstanding.
it said the shares were held on behalf of investment
clients and it said it had no intention of seeking control of
gabelli said its most recent purchases of decision/capital
fund stock included 95,800 shares bought april 3-6 on the
gabelli is an investment firm headquartered in new york
city. its gabelli and co subsidiary is a brokerage firm.
partnership buys ipco &lt;ihs> stake of 6.8 pct
mp co, a new york investment
partnership, told the securities and exchange commission it
bought a 6.8 pct stake in ipco corp common stock.
the partnership said it acquired 346,600 ipco shares,
paying 4.9 mln dlrs, because it believed the securities to be
it said it planned to regularly review its investment and
may in the future recommend business strategies or an
extraordinary corporate transaction such as a merger,
the partnership is controlled by marcus schloss and co inc,
a new york brokerage firm, and prime medical products inc, a
oper shr loss 30 cts vs loss 1.27 dlrs
oper net loss 8,648,000 vs loss 25.6 mln
revs 27.4 mln vs 33.3 mln
avg shrs 29.1 mln vs 20.1 mln
note: oper excludes loss on provision for discontinued
operations of 971,000 vs 12.2 mln and loss from conversion of
debt 587,000 vs gain of 1,734,000.
1985 oper excludes loss from pension plan liquidation of
631,000 and loss from discontinued operations of 1,015,000.
cadillac fairview says it has received some acquisition proposals
cadillac fairview says it has received some acquisition proposals
cadillac fairview says it received takeover bids
&lt;cadillac fairview corp ltd> said it
received proposals to acquire the company, following its
announcement last august that it had retained investment
dealers to solicit offers for all outstanding common shares.
cadillac fairview said the offers are subject to
clarification and negotiation and offered no further details.
shareholders approved the 525,000 dlr acquisition of
winterhalter by interface systems inc &lt;intf>.
the acquisition would be for 15 cts per winterhalter share.
&lt;american eagle petroleums ltd> year loss
shr loss 10 cts vs profit 17 cts
net loss 1,546,000 vs profit 4,078,000
revs 22.6 mln vs 38.9 mln
chilean trade surplus narrows slightly in february
chile's trade surplus narrowed to 102.2
mln dlrs in february, from 105.4 mln dlrs in the same month
last year, but it was above the 18.2-mln-dlr surplus recorded
in january 1987, the central bank said.
exports in february totalled 379.4 mln dlrs, 17.2 pct above
the january figure. imports fell 9.2 pct from the previous
month to 277.2 mln dlrs. the figures for the same month last
year were 314 mln and 208.6 mln dlrs, respectively.
the accumulated trade surplus over the first two months of
1987 stands at 120.4 mln dlrs against 132.8 mln dlrs the
analysts doubt fed firmed despite borrowing rise
economists said that they doubt the
federal reserve is firming policy to aid the dollar, despite
higher discount window borrowings in the latest two-week
statement period and very heavy borrowings wednesday.
data out today show net borrowings from the fed averaged
393 mln dlrs in the two weeks to wednesday, up from 265 mln
dlrs in the prior statement period. wednesday borrowings were
1.4 billion dlrs as federal funds averaged a high 6.45 pct.
"one could make a case that the fed is firming, but it
probably isn't," said william sullivan of dean witter reynolds.
sullivan said some may assume the fed has firmed policy
modestly to support the dollar because net borrowings in the
two-weeks to wednesday were nearly 400 mln dlrs after averaging
around 250 mln dlrs over the previous two months.
however, the dean witter economist noted that the latest
two-week period included a quarter end when seasonal demand
"some might argue that the fed was firming policy, but it
looks like it tried to play catchup with reserve provisions
late in the statement period and didn't quite make it," said
ward mccarthy of merrill lynch capital markets.
a fed spokesman told a press press conference today that
the fed had no large net one-day miss of two billion dlrs or
more in its reserve projections in the week ended wednesday.
still, mccarthy said it may have had a cumulative miss in
its estimates over the week that caused it to add fewer
reserves earlier in the week than were actually needed.
the fed took no market reserve management action last
thursday and friday, the first two days of the week. it added
temporary reserves indirectly on monday via two billion dlrs of
customer repurchase agreements and then supplied reserves
directly via system repurchases on tuesday and wednesday.
based on fed data out today, economists calculated that the
two-day system repurchase agreements the fed arrranged on
tuesday totaled around 5.9 billion dlrs. they put wednesday's
overnight system repos at approximately 3.4 billion dlrs.
"it is quite clear that the fed is not firming policy at
this time," said larry leuzzi of s.g. warburg and co inc.
citing the view shared by the other two economists, leuzzi
said the fed cannot really afford to seriously lift interest
rates to help the dollar because that would harm already weak
economies in the united states and abroad and add to the
financial stress of developing countries and their lenders.
"those who believe the fed tightened policy in the latest
statement period have to explain why it acted before the dollar
tumbled," said mccarthy of merrill lynch.
he said the dollar staged a precipitous drop as a new
statement period began today on disappointment yesterday's
washington meetings of international monetary officials failed
to produce anything that would offer substantive dollar aid.
in fact, currency dealers said there was nothing in
wednesday's g-7 communique to alter the prevailing view that
the yen needs to rise further to redress the huge trade
imbalance between the united states and japan.
the economists generally agreed that the fed is aiming for
steady policy now that should correspond to a weekly average
fed funds rate between six and 6-1/8 pct. this is about where
the rate has been since early november.
"i'm not so sure that the fed is engineering a tighter
policy to help the dollar, as some suspect," said sullivan of
if it is, however, he said that fed probably has just
nudged up its funds rate goal to around 6.25 to 6.35 pct from
valex petroleum inc &lt;valp> year dec 31
shr loss six cts vs loss 84 cts
net loss 219,632 vs loss 16.3 mln
revs 1.4 mln vs 2.8 mln
note:1985 net includes 15.5 mln dlrs of writedowns and tax
n.z. trading bank deposit growth eases slightly
seasonally adjusted deposit growth rose 2.1 pct in february
compared with a 2.6 pct rise in january, the reserve bank said.
year-on-year total deposits rose 28.9 pct compared with a
30.6 pct rise in january and 34.4 pct rise in february a year
ago period, the bank said in its weekly statistical release.
total deposits rose to 17.55 billion n.z. dlrs in february
compared with 17.18 billion in january and 13.61 billion in
bank of japan intervenes to buy dollars around 143.70 yen - dealers
bank of japan intervenes to buy dollars around 143.70 yen - dealers
dollar opens at record tokyo low 143.75 yen (previous record 144.70) - dealers
dollar opens at record tokyo low 143.75 yen (previous record 144.70) - dealers
dollar opens at tokyo record low of 143.75 yen
the dollar opened at a record tokyo low
of 143.75 yen despite aggressive bank of japan intervention,
the previous record low was 144.70 yen set on march 30. the
opening compares with 143.90/144.00 yen at the close in new
the central bank bought dollars through tokyo brokers just
before and after the market opening, the dealers said.
the intervention took place when the dollar fell to 143.20
the dollar opened at 1.8155/60 marks against 1.8187/97 in
the dollar fell as low as 142.90 yen despite central bank
intervention at 143.00 yen, dealers said.
selling pressure was strong from securities houses and
institutional investors in hectic and nervous trading on
underlying bearish sentiment for the dollar, they said.
most dealers were surpised by the dollar's sharp fall
against the yen in new york, although many had expected such a
institutional investors are expected to sell the dollar
aggressively if it rises to around 143.50 yen, dealers said.
the u.s. currency steadied well above 143.00 yen after bank
of japan intervention and scattered short-covering, they said.
the dollar opened at 1.5120/30 swiss francs against
1.5085/00 at the new york close.
sterling started at 1.6190/00 dlrs against 1.6195/05.
dollar falls below 143 yen in tokyo
the dollar fell below 143 yen in hectic
early tokyo trading despite aggressive bank of japan
after opening at a tokyo low of 143.75 yen, the dollar fell
as low as 142.90 yen on heavy selling led by securities firms
quiet in the week to wednesday, with prices rising slightly on
increased interest in wheat, millet and birdseed.
wheat for domestic consumption rose six australs per tonne
for export it rose eight to 108 per tonne from bahia
blanca, increased 0.50 to 104 at necochea and was unchanged at
maize increased one to 90 per tonne at buenos aires, was
unchanged at 82 in bahia blanca, increased 0.50 to 85 at
necochea and fell one to 88 at parana river ports.
sorghum from bahia blanca increased 0.50 australs to 76.50
per tonne and dropped one to 75 at rosario.
it was quoted at 75 at villa constitucion, san nicolas and
oats were unchanged at 168 per tonne at buenos aires.
millet from buenos aires and rosario rose five per tonne to
140 and birdseed rose 15 to 205 at buenos aires.
u.s. markets offer glimpse of volcker nightmare
today's turmoil in the u.s. financial
markets, with bond and stock prices tumbling in the dollar's
wake, is evidence of a major shift in investor psychology that
is likely to spell more turbulence ahead, economists said.
for two years, the markets had hailed the dollar's decline
as the cure-all for the u.s. trade deficit. interest rates fell
sharply and wall street became a one-way street, up.
but that confidence is now cracking as the financial
markets suddenly believe fed chairman paul volcker's
often-repeated warnings about the risks of a dollar collapse.
"volcker's been saying for a long time that a dollar
freefall would be extremely dangerous - now he's got it," said
david jones, economist at aubrey g. lanston and co inc.
the dollar fell below 144 yen today for the first time in
40 years as the group of seven finance ministers in washington
failed to convince the foreign exchange market that they have a
credible strategy for redressing global trade imbalances, short
of further depreciation of the dollar.
bonds suffered their biggest one-day drop in months amid
worries that the dollar's slide will rekindle inflation, scare
away foreign investors and force the fed to tighten credit.
the inflationary fears boosted gold bullion by more than 12
dlrs to a 1987 high of 432.20/70 dlrs an ounce, while the spike
in interest rates pulled the dow jones industrial average down
norman robertson, mellon bank chief economist, called the
markets' instability frightening. he believes economic
fundamentals do not justify the bearishness but said that "once
you start the ball rolling it's difficult to stop."
"there's a stark possibility that you could get a
destabilizing drop in the dollar that forces up interest rates
and drives us into recession. the markets are in a panic."
stephen marris of the institute for international economics
in washington, has been warning for a long time that the
controlled decline of the dollar since peaks of 3.47 marks and
264 yen in february 1985 could turn into a nightmare.
"we're still more or less on track for a hard landing... but
the agony may be fairly drawn out," marris told reuters.
marris does not expect the crisis to peak until later this
year, but he warned that the situation is so fragile that it
would take very little to touch off what he calls the second
phase of the hard landing, whereby a loss of confidence in the
dollar pushes up interest rates and leads to a recession.
the stock market's reaction today and its sharp drop on
march 30 shows how the loss of confidence could come about.
the fact that it has not happened yet is consistent with
historical experience, which teaches that domestic markets are
not affected until a currency is in the final stages of its
decline, marris said. he has forecast a drop to about 125 yen.
marris felt that a major impetus for the dollar's latest
weakness was the loss of credibility that central banks
suffered when they failed to prevent the dollar from falling
below 150 yen, the floor that the market believes was set as
part of the g-7 paris agreement in february.
robertson at mellon, by contrast, said the loss of
confidence was triggered last week when washington announced
plans to slap 300 mln dlrs of tariffs on japanese electronic
imports, raising the specter of a debilitating trade war.
many economists believe that long-run stability will not
return to the markets until the root cause of the trade gap is
addressed - excessive consumption in the u.s., reflected in the
but in the short term, given the failure of the g-7 and of
central bank intervention, some feel that the fed will have no
choice but to tighten credit to restore faith in the dollar.
"the only thing that will stop the dollar falling is a
substantial increase in the discount rate and a corresponding
cut abroad, at least by japan," said lanston's jones.
marris expects the fed to act quickly to raise interest
rates, even at the risk of increasing the debt burden for
american farmers, latin american governments and others.
but robert giordano, chief economist at goldman sachs and
co, scoffed at the notion. "it's ridiculous to think the federal
reserve will raise interest rates when the dollar is weak
against just one currency. this is yen strength, not dollar
giordano said the market was ignoring the progress being
made toward reducing the u.s. budget deficit.
"we're going to have one of the biggest reductions in the
budget deficit relative to gnp in history this year, and nobody
cares," he said, noting that only the deficit cut in 1968-69
he said he does not expect the dollar to collapse and
thinks interest rates are likely to fall back later this year.
but for now, market psychology has changed so abruptly that
a further drop in the bond market cannot be ruled out. "put on
average yen cd rates fall in latest week
certificates of deposit (cd) fell to 4.13 pct in the week ended
april 8 from 4.33 pct the previous week, the bank of japan
new rates (previous in brackets) -
average cd rates all banks 4.13 pct (4.33)
money market certificate (mmc) ceiling rates for week
starting from april 13 -       3.38 pct (3.58)
average cd rates of city, trust and long-term banks -
less than 60 days          4.15 pct (4.41)
average cd rates of city, trust and long-term banks -
over 270 days              4.05 pct (unqtd)
average yen bankers acceptance rates of city, trust and
30 to less than 60 days    3.98 pct (4.20)
japan has no plans to cut discount rate
bank of japan sources said the bank
has no plans to cut its discount rate.
they told reporters that there was no pressure on japan
during the group of seven (g-7) meeting here yesterday to lower
its discount rate. they added that they themselves do not feel
any need for a cut at all.
chancellor of the exchequer nigel lawson told reporters
earlier today that some countries - those with strong
currencies - might have to cut interest rates.
the bank of japan sources also said that it was too soon to
call the g-7 pact a failure.
the central bank sources were commenting on the dollar's
renewed tumble in new york and tokyo, which was sparked by
remarks by u.s. treasury secretary james baker that the
they said the market must have misinterpreted baker's
comments because he was referring to the dollar's fall since
the plaza agreement in september 1985, over a long-time span,
they added that the foreign exchange markest seem to seize
on anything to use as an excuse to drive the dollar one way or
the bank of japan sources said the u.s. is putting more
weight on the dollar/yen rate in terms of judging market
throughout the g-7 meeting, japan pointed to the dangers
that would arise from a further dollar fall because it would
reduce the flow of japanese capital to the u.s., hurting the
u.s. and world economies, they said.
in february and in march of this year, japanese investors
reduced their purchases of u.s. treasury bonds, the sources
each country in the g-7 - britain, canada, france, italy,
japan, the u.s. and west germany - has a different view about
currency stability, the bank of japan sources said.
this is because the overall foreign exchange market is a
triangle of dollar/yen, european currencies/yen and
at the time of the louvre agreement, european countries did
not want the yen to weaken against their currencies so they did
not object to the yen strengthening, they said.
australian unions and nsw government reach deal
union and new south wales government
officials have reached a compromise in a dispute over workers
compensation, averting increased industrial action in the
but some unions, including those of building and mining
workers, said they were dissatisfied with the deal and would
continue their strikes for a few more days.
state officials said the government had agreed to revise
its proposals to cut compensation and would allow slightly
higher cash benefits for injured workers.
under the original proposal, which sparked strikes and
other industrial action in the state on april 7, workers'
compensation would have been cut by one third. full details of
the compromise package are not yet known.
the labour council, affiliated to the australian council of
trade unions (actu), had threatened to paralyse new south wales
unless the government modified its pending legislation on the
state officials said the only sectors affected in the past
three days were some government building projects, railway
freight movement and cargo handling in sydney's ports.
ecuador crude oil output to resume next month
ecuador is due to resume limited crude oil
output on may 8 when a new 43 km pipeline to neighbouring
colombia should be finished, an energy ministry spokesman said.
oil output was halted on march 5 by an earthquake which
damaged 50 km of the main pipeline linking jungle oilfields at
lago agrio to the ecuadorean port of balao on the pacific.
about 13 km of the new link, capable of carrying some
50,000 barrels per day (bpd), has been built, he said.
ecuador pumped 245,000 to 250,000 bpd before the
the new link will connect lago agrio to puerto colon in
colombia, the starting point of columbia's pipeline to the
the government estimates it will take about four more
months to repair the lago agrio to balao pipeline and return
output to normal levels, the spokesman said.
thai rice exports fall in week to april 7
thailand exported 56,652 tonnes of rice
in the week ended april 7, down from 75,160 tonnes the previous
it said the government and private exporters shipped 41,607
private exporters concluded advance weekly sales for 48,062
tonnes against 22,086 tonnes the previous week.
thailand exported 1.29 mln tonnes of rice so far in 1987,
down from 1.39 mln tonnes a year ago.
it has commitments to export a further 353,045 tonnes this
japan sees marginal rise in edible oil demand
japan's edible oil demand will rise 1.5 pct in calendar 1987 to
1.68 mln tonnes from 1.65 mln in 1986.
domestic consumption will rise to 1.66 mln tonnes in 1987
from 1.64 mln in 1986, while imports will rise to 77,000 tonnes
from 70,000 and exports will be unchanged at 14,000.
edible oil supplies will total 1.75 mln tonnes in 1987
against 1.73 mln last year, including domestic output of 1.60
mln against 1.55 mln. domestic supplies will comprise 725,000
of soybean oil (706,000 in 1986), 638,000 of rapeseed oil
(609,000) and 235,000 of other origin oils (231,000).
interest rate differentials too small, banker says
languetin said a wider interest rate differential between the
dollar and stronger currencies was needed to brake the dollar's
at a news conference, he said japan and west germany could
try to stimulate their economies further by expanding money
supply, but he added "i'm not so sure it would be desirable if
"but what would be useful is a greater differential in
mobil australia reports 38.6 mln dlr 1986 loss
&lt;mobil oil australia ltd>, reported a 38.63 mln dlr net loss in
1986, a turnaround from its 37.25 mln profit in 1985.
the loss reflected a combination of strikes plus scheduled
and unscheduled refinery shutdowns for maintenance and
inventory losses caused by government controls on both crude
and product prices, mobil said in a statement.
however, equity-accounting of associates' profits reduced
the loss to 24 mln dlrs against a 37 mln profit in 1985.
mobil said it was confident 1987 would see a return to
profit as it built further on its 1985 company restructuring.
japan warns u.s. it may retaliate in trade dispute
japan warned the united states it may
take retaliatory measures if the united states imposes its
planned trade sanctions on april 17, a senior government
shinji fukukawa, vice minister of the international trade
and industry ministry, said in a statement japan would consider
measures under the general agreement on tariffs and trade and
other actions if the united states imposes 100 pct tariffs on
some japanese exports as planned next week.
however, fukukawa said japan was ready to continue trade
talks with the united states despite its failure to convince
america to call off the threatened tariffs during two days of
emergency talks which ended in washington yesterday.
last month president reagan announced the sanctions in
retaliation for what he called japan's failure to honour a july
1986 agreement to stop dumping computer microchips in markets
outside the united states and to open its home market to
fukukawa said the united states had regrettably not
listened to japan's explanation of its efforts to live up the
pact and said washington had not given any detailed explanation
of why it planned to impose the tariffs.
kuwait increases stake in sime darby
has increased its stake in &lt;sime darby bhd> to 63.72 mln
shares, representing 6.88 pct of sime darby's paid-up capital,
from 60.7 mln shares, malayan banking bhd &lt;mbkm.si> said.
since last november, kio has been aggressively in the open
market buying shares in sime darby, a major corporation with
interests in insurance, property development, plantations and
the shares will be registered in the name of malayan
banking subsidiary mayban (nominees) sdn bhd, with kio as the
smuggling blamed for closure of haitian sugar firm
a sugar mill which was this
nation's second largest employer closed its doors yesterday,
saying it had been run out of business by sugar smuggled from
miami and the neighbouring dominican republic.
the closure of the haitian american sugar company (hasco)
will idle 3,500 employees and affect as many as 30,000 to
40,000 small sugar cane planters in regions around the capital,
"because of unprecedented and ever-growing smuggling, hasco
regrets ... it cannot continue to accept delivery of sugar cane
after april 10," the mill warned planters earlier this week.
since president jean-claude duvalier fled haiti fourteen
months ago, widescale smuggling of basic goods such as cooking
oil, flour, rice, sugar and canned milk has lowered consumer
prices but bankrupted several local manufacturers, throwing
hundreds of thousands of haitians out of work.
at the hasco compound, where grim-faced workers lined up to
receive their last pay, spokesman georges d. rigaud showed a
warehouse stocked with an estimated 445,000 unsold 100-pound
"we are closing because of our huge stock of unsold sugar.
we have no money left to continue operations," rigaud said.
he said the company owed 7.6 mln dlrs and had borrowed an
additional 1.5 mln dlrs in order to pay off workers.
rigaud blamed the mill's problems on an order by duvalier
two years ago forbidding hasco from refining sugar.
he said the government then began importing refined sugar
at world market prices and reselling it at a huge profit and
the provisional military-civilian government that replaced
duvalier last year continued the policy.
"but now with all the smuggling even the state can't compete
with smuggled dominican refined sugar," rigaud said.
hasco workers earned 4.20 dlrs daily, considerably above
the usual minimum wage of three dlrs.
it is generally estimated that every employed haitian
supports at least six people. rigaud said hasco's closing at a
minimum would affect 280,000 to 300,000 people.
laid-off workers were bitter about the closure. "we're dead,
and it's the government that's causing us to die," declared
lucien felix, 34, who has five dependents.
taiwan announces new round of import tariff cuts
taiwan announced plans for another round
of import tariff cuts on 862 foreign goods shortly before trade
talks with washington which officials described as a move to
help balance trade with the united states.
wang der-hwa, deputy director of the finance ministry's
customs administration department, told reporters the list of
products included 60 items asked by washington.
"the move is part of our government efforts to encourage
imports from our trading partners, particularly from the united
he said the ministry sent a proposal today to the cabinet
that the tariffs on such products as cosmetics, bicycles,
apples, radios, garments, soybeans and television sets be cut
by between five and 50 pct.
the cabinet was expected to give its approval next thursday
and the new tariff cuts would be implemented possibly starting
taiwan introduced a sweeping tariff cut on some 1,700
foreign products last january aimed at helping reduce its
growing trade surplus with the united states, the island's
washington however was not satisfied with the cuts and
pressed for more reductions as a way of cutting its huge trade
washington's deficit with taipei rose to a record 13.6
billion u.s. dlrs last year from 10.2 billion in 1985. it
widened to 3.61 billion in the first quarter of 1987 from 2.78
billion a year earlier, taiwan's official figures show.
today's announcement came before a departure later today of
a 15-member taiwan delegation for washington for a series of
the delegation's leader, vincent siew, told reporters last
night he was leaving with "a heavy heart," meaning that he would
face tough talks in washington because of rising protectionist
sentiments in the u.s. congress. taiwan's 1986 trade surplus
with washington was the third largest, after japan and canada.
siew said the talks, starting on april 14, would cover u.s.
calls for taiwan to open its market to american products,
purchases of major u.s. machinery and power plant equipment,
import tariff cuts and protection of intellectual property.
"i am afraid this time we have to give more than take from
our talks with the u.s.," he said without elaborating.
british minister says he warned tokyo of sanctions
a british minister said he had given the
japanese government a clear warning of sanctions against
japanese companies if tokyo did not allow more access to its
internal markets "and it was clearly understood."
corporate affairs minister michael howard said on his
return from a visit to japan he thought the japanese were
beginning to appreciate the need to be "fair and open" about
at an airport news conference howard denied opposition
charges that his trip had been a failure because he had
"i did what i set out to do. i was sent to deliver a clear
message to the japanese government, and i delivered it very
clearly, and it has been clearly understood."
howard said that under the financial services act the
govenment had considerable flexibility in taking sanctions
against japanese companies and finance houses operating in
"it is not simply a question of withdrawing or refusing
operating licences. we can ban firms from certain countries
from carrying out certain kinds of business, while allowing
them to carry out other kinds."
"i hope we don't have to use these powers, but i made it
clear in japan that if our timetable isn't met, we shall use
he said it would be unfortunate if britain and japan became
involved in a tit-for-tat exchange, adding that japan gained
more than anyone else from an open trading relationship.
"i think they are beginning to appreciate that if this
relationship is to continue, it is very important for them to
be fair and open about access to their own markets."
on the question of the british firm cable and wireless plc
&lt;cawl.l>, which is trying to win a significant share of
telecommunications contracts in japan, howard said he had told
the japanese this was being widely regarded as a test case.
he said there were signs of movement on the case. cable and
wireless was due to take part in talks in japan next tuesday,
earlier this week british prime minister margaret thatcher
said britain could not go it alone on sanctions against japan,
but would have to coordinate action with its european community
community sources said after a meeting of trade officials
yesterday that the group might impose steep new tariffs on a
range of japanese goods to prevent diversion from united states
markets if washington imposes trade sanctions against tokyo as
yield rises on 30-day sama deposits
the yield on 30-day bankers security
deposit accounts issued this week by the saudi arabian monetary
agency (sama) rose by more than 1/8 point to 5.95913 pct from
5.79348 a week ago, bankers said.
sama decreased the offer price on the 900 mln riyal issue
to 99.50586 from 99.51953 last saturday. like-dated interbank
deposits were quoted today at 6-3/8, 1/8 pct -- 1/8 point
sama offers a total of 1.9 billion riyals in 30, 91 and
180-day paper to banks in the kingdom each week.
uganda pulls out of coffee market - trade sources
has stopped offering coffee on the international market because
it is unhappy with current prices, coffee trade sources said.
the board suspended offerings last week but because of its
urgent need for cash it was not immediately clear how long it
hundreds of ugandan coffee farmers and processors have been
waiting several months for payment from the cmb, which has had
trouble finding enough railway wagons to move the coffee to the
foreign banks have contributed to the cash crisis by
holding up remittance of uganda's hard currency earnings from
coffee exports, the government newspaper new vision said.
the banks are holding up to seven mln dlrs in coffee money
and president yoweri museveni is thinking of imposing a penalty
banking sources said a third factor in the crisis was that
commercial banks have lent the board only 77 billion shillings
-- the equivalent of 55 mln dlrs -- for crop finance in the
current coffee year, while the government had asked for 100
the cmb has 455,000 60-kg bags of coffee, about 15 pct of
annual production, stockpiled in kampala awaiting shipment.
the crop accounts for over 90 pct of uganda's export
earnings and the recent slide in prices to four-year lows is
likely to more than offset an expected increase in production.
cmb officials have forecast that because the government has
restored law and order in important growing areas, uganda will
produce over three mln bags of coffee in the year ending
september 30, about 25 pct more than in 1985/6.
w.german cocoa grind up 2.9 pct in first quarter
the west german cocoa grind rose 2.9
pct to 55,190 tonnes in the first quarter of 1987 from 53,643
tonnes in the same quarter of of 1986, the bonn-based
confectionery industry association said in a statement.
dry spell in philippines damages agriculture crops
a prolonged dry spell has damaged
111,350 hectares of rice and corn plantations in 10 provinces
in the central and southern philippines, agriculture officials
they said some 71,070 tonnes of agricultural produce
estimated at about 250 mln pesos was lost to the lack of
rainfall. they warned of a severe drought if the prevailing
agriculture secretary carlos dominguez said he hoped the
losses would be offset by the expected increase in output in
other, normally more productive areas not affected by the dry
affected were 14,030 hectares of palay (unmilled rice),
representing a production loss of 22,250 tonnes valued at 77.8
mln pesos, department of agriculture reports said.
about 48,820 tonnes of corn from 97,320 hectares valued at
170.8 mln pesos have also been lost, they said.
officials said the hectarage planted to palay that has been
hit by the drought accounted for only one pct of national total
thus the damage is considered negligible.
in the case of corn, they said the loss can be filled by
production from non-traditional corn farms which diversified
into the cash crop from sugar two years ago.
the philippine coconut authority said coconut production
in the major producing region of bicol might drop by 25 pct to
320,000 tonnes if the dry spell continued. there were no
spanish unemployment falls slightly in march
10,465 people to 2.97 mln or 21.4 pct of the workforce in
registered unemployment in february was 2.98 mln people, or
the figures were nonetheless higher than those for march
1986 -- 2.8 mln people and 21 pct of the workforce.
hungary raises prices in effort to curb deficit
increases for a range of food and consumer products as part of
its efforts to curb a soaring budget deficit.
the official mti news agency said the government decided
consumer price subsidies had to be cut to reduce state
spending. from today the price of meat will rise by an average
18 pct and that of beer and spirits by 10 pct, mti said.
mti said consumer goods will also become more expensive,
with the price of refrigerators rising some five pct. it also
announced a number of measures to ease hardship, including
statistics indicate the budget deficit tripled in 1986 to
47 billion forints. central banker janos fekete has said the
finance ministry is trying to cut the 1987 shortfall to between
30 and 35 billion from a planned 43.8 billion.
a major tax reform, including the introduction of a
western-style valued added tax, is planned for january 1988 in
an effort to cure problems in state spending.
but diplomats said the latest announcement shows the
authorities were forced to act quickly to keep this year's
the measures are also aimed at cooling an overheated
economy, and could help dampen hungarians' appetite for
imported western goods which consume increasingly expensive
the diplomats also said, however, that they did not expect
the kind of social unrest that followed sharp price rises in
other east bloc states, notably poland.
bank of japan actively buying dollars at around 142.20 yen in tokyo - dealers
bank of japan actively buying dollars at around 142.20 yen in tokyo - dealers
china wants to buy 5,000 tonnes pakistani cotton
china is negotiating with pakistan to
buy 5,000 tonnes of cotton this year, after importing the same
amount last year under a barter agreement, chinese consulate
chinese ambassador tian ding told a meeting of pakistani
industrialists on thursday that china intended to increase
imports from pakistan to reduce a trade imbalance.
pakistani officials estimate the country's cotton output
from the current crop at a record 7.6 mln bales (375 pounds
each). last year's output totalled 7.2 mln bales and domestic
consumption was just below three mln bales, they said.
australian government must cut spending, anz says
the government must announce harsh cuts
in spending in its may 14 economic statement if it is to give
an adequate response to australia's economic problems, the anz
cuts of two billion dlrs would be insufficient against the
backdrop of a 12 billion dlr government deficit and a 14
billion dlr current account deficit, it said in its monthly
"for the past two years, the government has struggled with
an economic reality that demands measures beyond those which it
sees as politically practicable," it said.
the political climate meant there would be a continued
over-reliance on monetary policy to hold the exchange rate and
maintain confidence in economic management, anz said.
"the cost of this approach is that the much-needed revival
of business investment will be further postponed," it said.
the economy was now on a modest growth upswing boosted by
export and import-replacement industries which had created a
false suggestion that the worst adjustments to the balance of
payments crisis were past. "unfortunately, successful adjustment
to australia's deep-seated economic problems remains a
in its economic forecasts, anz said it expected moderate
overall economic growth with gross domestic product (gdp)
rising 2.7 pct this year and 2.4 pct in 1988.
the current account deficit would narrow to five pct of gdp
this year and 4.3 pct in 1988 and net foreign debt would grow
strongly from 81 billion at the end of 1986 to 97.2 billion at
end-1987 and 110.3 billion a year later.
inflation would fall to 8.5 pct in 1987 and 7.5 pct in 1988
from 8.9 pct in 1986 and further falls in real wages were
smelting co of australia pty ltd said it lowered its ex-works
port kembla refinery copper price by 20 dlrs to 2,160 dlrs a
japan central bank actively buys dollars in tokyo
the bank of japan actively bought dollars
here in early afternoon trade at around 142.20 yen, dealers
the central bank had placed buy orders at that level and
prevented the dollar from falling when it came under heavy
selling pressure from investment trusts and trading houses,
however, the intervention failed to boost the u.s. currency
significantly from the 142.20 yen level, they added.
the dollar was trading around its midday rate of 142.30
yen. it had opened here at 141.85 yen.
texaco sees business little hit by bankruptcy move
texaco inc &lt;tx> said its decision to
file for protection under chapter 11 of the u.s. bankruptcy
code will not affect the majority of its businesses.
it said its subsidiaries, which account for 96 pct of its
32.6 billion dlrs in revenues and 79 pct of its net property,
plant and equipment, were free of the action.
only parent holding company, texaco inc, and operating
subsidiaries, texaco capital inc and texaco capital n.v, are
but the company said it was likely to suspend its 75 cents
per share quarterly common stock dividend and halt repayments
on debts of some 6.8 billion dlrs.
texaco said it filed for chaper 11 because suppliers were
demanding cash payments and banks were withholding loans as a
result of a legal dispute with pennzoil co &lt;pzl>.
texaco is fighting a texas law requiring it to post a bond
of more than 10 billion dlrs before it can appeal a 1985
judgment that ruled it illegally interfered with pennzoil's
1984 acquisition of getty petroleum corp &lt;gty>. the bond almost
matches the damages awarded against texaco.
should texaco fail to place the bond, pennzoil could begin
to attach its assets to secure the judgment.
last monday, the supreme court overturned a decision to cut
texaco's bond to one billion dlrs, and sent the issue back to
analysts said the bankruptcy filing effectively froze all
texaco's obligations while it continued to appeal the merits of
"attempts last week to win a compromise on both the bond
issue and the larger dispute failed," james kinnear, texaco's
president and chief executive officer, told reporters.
kinnear said pennzoil's disclosure in court papers on
friday that it wanted to extend the bond issue hearing until
the end of april, pushed texaco further towards chapter 11.
pennzoil had asked texaco to post a 5.6 billion dlr cash
bond and to reduce its dividend to not more than 50 pct of
earnings. pennzoil also wanted assurances that texaco would not
texaco offered to put up one billion dlrs in a letter of
credit and agreed not to let the value of its assets fall under
joseph jamail, a houston attorney for pennzoil, said the
company had made its latest settlement offer to texaco on
saturday and was taken by surprise when texaco filed for
he declined to reveal the amount of the proposal, citing a
confidentiality agreement between the two companies. "texaco
told us they would get back to us but instead they chose to go
attorneys for pennzoil said they believed the company would
prevail in court appeals, adding that texaco's assets were
ample ultimately to pay the pennzoil judgment in full.
paton reports u.s. green coffee roastings higher
u.s. roastings of green coffee in the
week ended april 4 were about 275,000 (60-kilo) bags, including
that used for soluble production, compared with 215,000 bags in
the corresponding week of last year and about 320,000 bags in
the week ended march 28, george gordon paton and co inc
it said cumulative roastings for calendar 1987 now total
4,440,000 bags, compared with 4,540,000 bags by this time last
&lt;wmng.s> (wmc) said it sold its entire holding of 22.13 mln
shares in the gold mining company &lt;australian consolidated
wmc gave no details, but stockbrokers said the sale was
made at eight dlrs a share on friday to a number of u.s.,
european and australian investors through wmc's usual brokers.
the company purchased the 19.9 pct parcel in early march
from amax inc &lt;amx.n> at 6.32 dlrs a share ahead of a
one-for-three bonus issue when amax sold its entire 47 pct
stake in acm to a number of local companies.
yugoslav economy worsened in 1986, bank data shows
national bank economic data for 1986
shows that yugoslavia's trade deficit grew, the inflation rate
rose, wages were sharply higher, the money supply expanded and
the value of the dinar fell.
the trade deficit for 1986 was 2.012 billion dlrs, 25.7 pct
higher than in 1985. the trend continued in the first three
months of this year as exports dropped by 17.8 pct, in hard
currency terms, to 2.124 billion dlrs.
yugoslavia this year started quoting trade figures in
dinars based on current exchange rates, instead of dollars
based on a fixed exchange rate of 264.53 dinars per dollar.
yugoslavia's balance of payments surplus with the
convertible currency area fell to 245 mln dlrs in 1986 from 344
mln in 1985. the national bank said the drop was due to a
deterioration in trade. exports to the convertible currency
area rose 11.6 pct from 1985, while imports rose 17.8 pct.
retail prices rose an average of 88.1 pct in 1986 while
industrial producer prices rose by 70.6 pct, the bank's data
showed. the cost of living rose by 89.1 pct.
personal incomes rose by 109 pct in 1986.
prime minister branko mikulic warned in february that wages
were too high given the level of productivity.
mikulic introduced a law cutting wages to the level of the
last quarter of 1986 and tying future rises to productivity.
bank statistics show the overall 1986 rise in m-1 money
supply was 109.1 pct with a year-end position of 3,895.9
billion dinars. yugoslavs have 9.8 billion dlrs worth of
foreign currency savings in the country and 20 billion dlrs
abroad, mostly owned by workers employed in western europe.
the dinar fell by 73.1 pct against a basket of hard
currencies in 1986. the highest depreciation was against the
swiss franc, 85.3 pct, and the lowest against the u.s. dollar,
anz bank sets one-for-two bonus issue
group ltd &lt;anza.s> said it will make a one-for-two bonus issue
from its asset revaluation reserve to shareholders registered
the proposed bonus and an increase in authorised capital to
one billion one-dlr par shares from 600 mln will be put to
shareholders for approval at an extraordinary general meeting
on may 26, the anz said in a statement.
the issue will absorb about 230 mln dlrs of the 260.9 mln
standing in the asset revaluation reserve, it said.
the bank said that by lowering the dividend rate it expects
to maintain the value of dividend payout on the enlarged
capital at about the level of its last full year ended
september 30. the group paid 31 cents a share and 133.1 mln
dlrs in all for that year.
shareholders will also be asked to approve changes in the
bank's articles of association to allow it to offer shares in
lieu of the interim dividend at a discount of five pct to the
the group is the latest to announce a tax-free bonus issue
ahead of dividend imputation, effective july 1.
uae central bank cd yields rise
(cd) offered by the united arab emirates central bank were
higher than last monday's offering, the bank said.
the one-month cd rose 1/4 point to 6-3/8 pct, while the
two, three and six-month maturities rose 5/16 point each to
6-7/16, 6-1/2 and 6-5/8 pct respectively.
started trial production at yunfu in the southern province of
it said the mine has an annual output capacity of three mln
tonnes of sulphur-iron ore, which can be used without
processing because of its high quality.
china, chile to build copper tube plant in china
metals industrial corp and &lt;wrought copper ltd> of chile signed
a contract to jointly build a copper tube plant on the
outskirts of peking, the china daily said.
the beijing-santiago copper tube co involves an investment
of 9.93 mln dlrs and will, on completion, have a production
capacity of 5,000 tonnes of copper tubes a year, it said.
it said chile will supply copper at preferential rates to
the venture, whose equipment comes from &lt;wednesbury tube co> of
the agreement calls for joint sino-chilean management of
the venture for 15 years, the paper said.
it said the venture is the first economic cooperation
project between china and chile, but gave no more details.
china is a major copper importer. customs figures show it
imported 171,118 tonnes of copper and alloy in calendar 1986,
down from 355,652 tonnes in 1985.
singapore external trade gains 8.8 pct in quarter
pct in first quarter 1987, against a 12.4 pct decline in the
same period last year and two pct growth in the previous
quarter, the trade development board said.
it said exports over the period rose by 8.7 pct to 12.38
billion dlrs and imports by 8.9 pct to 14.64 billion for a
trade deficit of 2.26 billion, against a 2.06 billion deficit
in the same 1986 period and 1.78 billion deficit previously.
the growth was attributed to the strength of non-oil trade,
especially computers and computer parts, electronic components
malaysia's 1986 manufacturing exports rise 24 pct
rose by 24.5 pct to 15.1 billion ringgit in 1986, chairman of
the export promotion council ahmad sarji abdul hamind said.
the improved export performance was led by electrical and
electronic products, textiles, footwear, clothing, processed
food, timber, chemical and rubber products, he told a news
however, total gross exports for the year declined by 5.6
pct to 35.9 billion ringgit from 38 billion in 1985 due to a
fall in major commodity exports and weak prices, he said.
offer for dome may short-circuit its debt talks
a 3.22 billion dlr offer for dome
petroleum ltd &lt;dmp.mo> by transcanada pipelines ltd &lt;trp.to>
may short-circuit dome's restructuring plan and open the door
for more takeover bids, oil analysts said.
dome is trying to get approval for a plan to refinance debt
of more than 4.5 billion dlrs by july 1, 1987, when an interim
debt plan that allowed the canadian oil and gas firm to defer
substantial payments to creditors will expire.
analysts said transcanada's bid signals dome's debtholders
that an alternative exists to dome's debt plan.
dome announced its plan to 56 major creditors as well as
public noteholders in march after several months of delicate
transcanada's proposal "amounts to a quasi debt
restructuring," oil analyst doug gowland of brown baldwin nisker
calgary-based dome's restructuring plan would allow
creditors to convert debt to common shares under a formula yet
to be negotiated. payments on remaining debt would be linked to
cash flow generated by assets pledged against the debt.
"the weakness of the whole debt-refinancing proposal is that
even with approval of creditors, there is no assurance that
dome will in fact be able to repay all of its debt obligations,"
said wilf gobert, an oil analyst for peters and co ltd in
transcanada's announcement came as a surprise since dome
was waiting for responses from creditors on its proposed
the transcanada proposal could open the bidding for dome
since other potential buyers were probably waiting for lenders
to agree to a restructuring, he added.
"i would think that the debtholders would want to entertain
any and all offers (for dome)," gobert said.
dome spokesman david annesley said in new york that
transcanada's announcement could be seen as an attempt to fix
the bidding price for dome and an effort to preclude other
possible buyers from making an offer. "by drawing attention to
us in our discussions, it means that others may be a little
reluctant to come forward," he said.
dome does not consider transcanada's proposal a formal
offer because the pipeline utility's announcement breached a
confidential agreement between the two companies, he said.
dome responded to the statement by suspending discussions
with transcanada in order to pursue talks with other
unidentified parties. however, dome said its management and
financial advisers would evaluate all proposals, including
gowland said transcanada's offer is probably a fair price
for the company's 36.1 mln acres of oil and gas land holdings.
however, he said not enough financial details are known
about dome's debt restructuring to compare the value of
u.k. money market deficit forecast at 400 mln stg
the bank of england said it forecast a
shortage of around 400 mln stg in the money market today.
among the main factors affecting liquidity, bills maturing
in official hands and the take-up of treasury bills will drain
partly offsetting these outflows, a fall in note
circulation will add some 340 mln stg, exchequer transactions
around 300 mln and bankers' balances above target about 50 mln.
bangladesh cost of living index falls in january
bangladesh's cost of living index fell
1.09 pct in january to 479, after a 1.6 pct decline to 484.28
in december (1973-74 base 100), the bureau of statistics said.
the cost of living index fell 0.14 pct to 434.49 in january
in the year to january, inflation ran at 10.24 pct after an
11.3 pct rate a month earlier and 9.72 pct a year earlier.
in a sttement there was "no foundation" to press speculation that
it would sell its stake in rothmans international plc &lt;rot.l>
to philip morris inc &lt;mo.n>, or that it would buy morris'
in the 1986 report, rothmans international said rht, which
is controlled by &lt;rupert foundation sa>, owned 18.25 mln
ordinary and 64.37 mln b ordinary shares, or 99.9 pct and 26.1
morris owns 79.8 mln b ordinary shares, or 32.4 pct.
rothmans b shares, which firmed on the speculation to close at
273p from 241p on friday, eased to 245.5p at 0838 gmt.
trade issues straining ec's patience with japan
community are starting to run out of patience with japan which
they believe has repeatedly promised major initiatives to open
its market to imports, but as often made only minor moves.
diplomatic sources here said several recent actions by ec
countries bear witness to a new disillusionment with the
willingness, or at least the ability, of the japanese
government to reduce its massive trade surplus with the ec.
however, they said an all-out trade war may be far off, as
ec states know they would suffer almost as much as japan.
senior ec diplomats gave a generally favourable reaction to
an ec executive commission proposal under which the ec could
raise tariffs on a range of japanese products if the u.s.
carries out a threat to make a similar move on april 17.
the ec tariffs, which would involve renouncing obligations
entered into with the world trade body gatt, would be designed
to stop a diversion of exports to the ec market from that of
the diplomats were meeting as tokyo announced that the ec's
trade deficit with japan reached a record 2.13 billion dlrs in
march, up from 1.94 billion in february.
in 1986, japanese exports to the ec totalled 30.67 billion
dlrs, up 4.5 pct from 1985, while ec exports to japan fell one
in paris, trade minister michel noir said france has
decided to give japan a taste of its own medicine.
burgeoning imports of microwave ovens and of frozen
coquilles st jacques will be restricted by a strict application
of french quality standards -- something ec states say often
happens to their own exports entering japan.
britain has threatened to withdraw the licences of japanese
banks and insurance companies to operate in the city of london,
because the british cable and wireless company lost out in
competition for a japanese telecommucations contract.
however, british officials in london have said that the
government may have gone too far in implying that it would take
immediate drastic action unless the contract was reopened.
by contrast, west germany, with the ec's most successful
economy, has never threatened tokyo with sanctions, preferring
to rely on firm diplomacy and encouragement of its own
industries to surmount obstacles to export to japan.
the ec commission itself has switched its tactics in recent
years, substituting general calls for action by japan to open
its market with specific demands for moves in key areas.
at present, it is, for instance, pressuring japan to end
allegedly discriminatory taxation of imported wines and
spirits, to ensure ec companies have a chance to win contracts
for the building of a new international airport, and to
simplify certification and safety checks on imported cars.
ec officials say these tactics yield some benefits, but
often the japanese announce modifications of their non-tariff
barriers which open the door to imports by only a token amount.
they stress, however, that any action must be taken by the
ec as a whole to stop beggar-my-neighbour action.
one of the problems britain could face if it were to
withdraw licences for japanese banks would be that the bankers
would be welcomed with open arms in frankfurt or amsterdam,
morgan crucible says prospects are encouraging
morgan crucible co plc &lt;mgcr.l> said the
prospects for 1987 were encouraging, with orders and sales
significantly up on last year in all divisions.
it said there were good opportunities for growth in both
existing and recently acquired businesses as well as for growth
it earlier announced a 6.1 mln stg rise in pre-tax profit
to 24.8 mln stg for the year to december 28. turnover rose to
most of its companies performed well despite a slowdown in
the u.s., u.k. and australian economies in the first half.
currency fluctuations reduced pretax profit by around one
morgan said although profits in the electronics sector
improved to 1.0 mln stg from 100,000 stg previously, results
sales were lower than expected, due mainly to delayed
defence orders and cancellations. however, it said it had taken
the necessary remedial action, obtained new business and was
now proceeding with the delivery of major delayed orders.
morgan shares firmed two pence to 318p at 0905 gmt from
morgan crucible pretax profit rises 6.1 mln stg
div 5.0p vs 4.6p making 9.2p vs 8.5p
turnover 242.1 mln stg vs 211.5 mln
pretax profit 24.8 mln vs 18.7 mln
tax 6.7 mln vs 5.8 mln
operating profit 28.3 mln vs 21.3 mln
investment income 1.0 mln vs 0.7 mln
net finance charges 4.5 mln vs 3.3 mln
company full name is morgan crucible co plc &lt;mgcr.l>
minorities and provisions for preference dividends 0.7 mln
extraordinary debit - 0.9 mln vs 1.3 mln credit
carbon 8.3 mln vs 7.0 mln
technical ceramics 7.0 mln vs 5.6 mln
thermal ceramics 7.6 mln vs 4.6 mln
speciality chemicals 4.4 mln vs 4.0 mln
electronics 1.0 mln vs 0.1 mln
2.6 pct in february, after a 1.8 pct fall in january, showing a
4.4 pct rise over february 1986 and reaching its highest level
ever, the central bureau of statistics said.
the rise reflected recovery in almost all sectors after an
exceptionally cold spell in january, the bureau said, adding
that the highest rises were seen in the forest, chemical and
kenya devalues shilling by 0.6 pct against sdr
kenya devalued the shilling by 0.6 pct
against the special drawing right (sdr) in response to the
decline of the dollar last last week, bankers said.
the central bank of kenya set the shilling at 20.7449 to
the sdr compared with the 20.6226 rate in force since the last
the kenyan shilling has lost 5.6 pct of its value against
the sdr this year in a series of devaluations designed to keep
the value of the dollar above 16 shillings.
awb chairman urges farmers not to cut plantings
markets through lack of availability if plantings for the
coming 1987/88 season are significantly reduced, australian
wheat board (awb) chairman clinton condon said.
"if predictions of a 30 pct decrease in plantings prove
true, australia may not be able to supply wheat to some of its
valuable markets," he said in a statement.
condon did not say who had made the predictions, but an awb
spokesman said there was a general industry feeling that
farmers, hard hit by low prices and rising costs, could cut
back plantings sharply. wheat sowing normally begins in may.
however, condon said he did not believe plantings would be
cut by as much as 30 pct although he realised many farmers were
he said the awb expects the area sown to be about 10.7 mln
hectares, down from 11.3 mln in 1986/87 when the crop was about
16 mln tonnes. final crop estimates for 1986/87 and planting
intentions for 1987/88 are not yet available.
if the awb is unable, because of a short-term cut in
plantings, to meet the needs of the markets it has developed
with much time and effort, it may have great difficulty selling
wheat to those markets in the future, condon said.
"markets which rely on a steady supply of australian wheat
understand a decrease in production due to drought but they
will have difficulty understanding a deliberate decision to
"if australia wants wheat to continue as a major export
income earner, governments and government authorities will need
to closely examine ways of contributing to the continuing
viability of the wheat industry," he added.
australia's leading wheat markets include china, egypt,
iran, iraq, the soviet union and japan.
williams details acceptances of norcros offer
&lt;williams holdings plc> said that it had
received acceptances for its offer for norcros plc &lt;ncro.l>
from the holders of 233,448 norcros ordinary shares, or 0.18
pct, and 180,240 preference shares, or 8.19 pct.
before the 568 mln stg contested bid was launched last
month, williams held 850,000 ordinary shares, or 0.67 pct and
since then it had acquired options to buy a further 1.99 mln or
the offer has been extended to april 15. norcros shares
eased 26p to 410p on the announcement while williams fell to
dutch feed compounder starts case against ec levy
a major animal feed producer, cehave
nv veghel (chv), has begun legal proceedings against the
application of the european community grain co-responsibility
levy, with the full backing of the dutch animal grain and feed
trade association, het comite, association chief executive
oral proceedings were held in the hague on friday and the
court said it would give its verdict within six weeks. "however,
that is the normal wording and we expect the hague court to
refer questions on the interpretation and application of the
levy to the european court of justice in luxembourg," pex added.
het comite claims the way the levy is applied does not take
account of currency cross-rates of exchange and can mean a
compounder in one country being asked to pay a higher levy in
its own national currency than it received down the chain from
the original producer of the grain.
"we would like the business administration court in the
hague to ask the luxembourg court of justice not only whether
the dutch grain commodity board, the levy collection agency,
has interpreted the levy regulations correctly, but also
whether the regulations themselves may contravene european law,"
"it is only with great regret that we have taken this route,
but we have had no political help, and therefore have no option
even though it could take years," pex added.
het comite asked chv to act as a test case against the
grain levy because the bill the company received from the
commodity board included grain from a wide variety of origins
and was therefore considered to be the best general basis for a
legal challenge to the levy, pex noted.
het comite's actions will run in tandem with questions on
the levy already posed to the luxembourg court in a case
brought by the association of european animal feed
china has raised the state purchase
prices of corn, rice, cottonseed and shelled peanuts from april
1 to encourage farmers to grow them, the official china
the paper said the price paid for corn from 14 northern
provinces, cities and regions has increased by one yuan per 50
kg. a foreign agricultural expert said the rise will take the
price to 17 fen per jin (0.5 kg) from 16 fen.
the paper said the price for long-grained rice from 10
southern provinces and cities was raised by 1.5 yuan per 50 kg.
the paper said the price for round-grained rice from 11
provinces, regions and cities in central, east and northwest
china has been increased by 1.75 yuan per 50 kg. it gave no
it said local authorities must inform farmers of the price
increases before farmers begin planting, to encourage
chinese officials have said farmers are unwilling to grow
grain because they can earn more from other crops.
west german cocoa grindings within expectations
grindings, which rose 2.9 pct from the same 1986 quarter, were
they described the results, announced saturday, as normal
and unspectacular, considering that the grind in the fourth
quarter was rather high and some was carried over into the
grindings rose to 55,190 tonnes from 53,643 in the first
1986 quarter. a spokesman for the confectionery industry
association said that west german grindings are expected to
stay relatively high in comparison to other west european
st.gobain unit issues ecu bond with gold warrants
de st.gobain, is issuing a 75 mln ecu bond with gold warrants
attached, due may 6, 1992 carrying a 4-1/2 pct coupon and
priced at par, lead manager salomon brothers international ltd
fees comprise 1-1/4 pct selling concession with 5/8 pct for
management and underwriting combined. listing is in luxembourg.
each 1,000 ecu bond carries one gold warrant exercisable
from may 6, 1987 until may 6, 1990 entitling the holder to
purchase one ounce at an exercise price of 490 dlrs.
commonwealth bank cuts australia prime to 17.5 pct
the commonwealth bank of australia said
it will lower its prime lending rate to 17.5 pct from 18.25,
the bank's new rate will be the lowest of australia's
current prime rates. they now range from 17.75 pct to 18.5
after a recent series of reductions since late march following
an easier trend in short term money market rates.
two of the three other major trading banks now have prime
rates of 18 pct and one of 18.25.
the commonwealth's move reverses an increase from 17.5 pct
hepworth sells u.s. unit to globe machine
said it had agreed to sell its &lt;western plastics corp> unit to
&lt;globe machine manufacturing co> for 16.25 mln dlrs cash.
western, which makes polystyrene foam and container
products, has net assets of 19.3 mln dlrs and reported a 1986
the proceeds of the sale would be used to reduce borrowings
and develop activities in the u.k.
hepworth shares eased 0.5p on the announcement to 227.5p.
bond corp to acquire 80 pct of merlin pete
bond corp holdings ltd &lt;bona.s> said it
has agreed to acquire an 80 pct stake in &lt;merlin international
petroleum corp> from &lt;crowley maritime corp> for 90.8 mln u.s.
of this total, 7.8 mln dlrs is due on exchange of contracts
on april 30 and 69 mln on july 7, subject to any regulatory
approvals being obtained, bond said in a statement.
the balance of 14 mln dlrs will be paid as required by
merlin for its exploration and production commitments, it said.
bond said merlin has a 6.25 pct working interest plus a 2.5
pct reversionary interest in the papua new guinea permit,
ppl-17, the site of the iagifu oil discovery.
merlin also has a 12.5 pct stake in the adjacent papuan
basin permit, ppl-18, which contains the juha gas and
in addition to papua new guinea, merlin has petroleum
exploration and production interests in the u.s., bond added.
institutes divided on outlook for german economy
the five leading west german economic
research institutes have failed to agree about how strongly the
domestic economy will expand this year but revised down
forecasts contained in a report published six months ago.
the three research groups of kiel, hamburg and essen
predicted in the institutes' joint spring report that gross
national product (gnp) would rise by two pct in 1987, compared
with 2.4 pct in 1986. the five institutes had jointly forecast
three pct 1987 growth in october last year.
taking a dissenting view, the diw institute of west berlin
and munich's ifo institute predicted only one pct 1987 growth.
the joint report said that the estimates of economic
development made by the diw and ifo were "markedly less
favourable" than those of the other three.
the diw and ifo forecast the economy would pick up after a
slow start to the year. "in the second half of 1987 there will,
however, only be a weak upward movement," they said.
the two institutes said external economic factors which
were currently damaging exports and pushing up imports would
dominate the economic environment throughout the year. they saw
exports falling by a real 2-1/2 pct in 1987 and predicted no
marked improvement in the course of the year.
the other three institutes, however, wrote: "the decline in
demand and production (seen) in the winter months does not
indicate the beginning of a cyclical downswing."
they said the sharp rise of the mark had led to corporate
uncertainty and companies had not carried out investment plans.
but they expected that many investments had not been cancelled
but only put off. "it can be presumed that the braking actions
(on the economy) will diminish markedly this year."
they added: "the domestic prerequisites for a continuation
of the economic uptrend are still favourable."
these three institutes said diminishing external burdens
combined with favourable domestic conditions meant an upturn in
demand and production could be expected by the spring.
however, this projection was clouded by risks including the
further development of the mark against the dollar.
contrary to the diw and ifo, the three institutes said that
while exports would continue to be the weak point of the
economy in 1987, "there is good reason to believe that exports
will soon bottom out and that a slight rise will emerge during
the course of the year." they predicted an overall 0.5 pct fall
in exports in 1987, the same as in 1986.
the three more positive institutes saw private consumption
rising by four pct in 1987, compared with 4.2 pct in 1986,
while diw and ifo predicted a three pct increase.
they saw the climate for equipment investment improving but
predicted only a rise of four pct in 1987 against 4.6 pct in
1986. ifo and diw saw these investments rising by only two pct.
all the institutes predicted only a slight decline in
unemployment. the kiel, hamburg and essen institutes said the
jobless total would average 2.17 mln in 1987 compared with 2.23
mln in 1986 and predicted a rise in the number of people in
these three institutes said new jobs would be created
mainly in the private services sector and also by the state in
the context of job creation measures. the construction industry
was likely to engage new workers for the first time since 1980
but they predicted either no rise in employment in the
manufactured goods industry or only a slight expansion.
the diw and ifo said rises in employment would occur only
in the tertiary sector, while "the number employed in the
the diw and ifo said unemployment would only decline to
2.20 mln in 1987 from 2.23 mln in 1986.
they saw the current account surplus falling in 1987 to 58
billion marks from 78 billion in 1986. the other three saw a
current account surplus in 1987 of at least 60 billion marks
and predicted that the trade surplus would fall to only around
100 billion marks from 112 billion in 1986.
the institutes agreed that consumer prices would start to
rise in 1987, after they declined in 1986, and all five
predicted an average increase over the year of 0.5 pct.
blue arrow to buy u.s. richards companies
&lt;blue arrow plc> said it had agreed
terms to acquire a group of u.s. companies collectively known
as the &lt;richards companies>, which specialise in executive
recruitment and management consultancy on personnel matters.
the total consideration will be 29 mln u.s. dlrs of which
50 pct will be payable in cash and 50 pct by the issue of 1.36
mln new ordinary shares in blue arrow.
the richard companies made a pre-tax profit of 3.6 mln dlrs
in the year to end-1986, on turnover of 7.1 mln dlrs with net
tangible assets at the end of 1986 of 3.4 mln dlrs.
blue arrow shares were trading 9p lower at 670 this
saudi riyal deposits surge on u.s. rate rise
surged across the board as banks tried to build long positions
in anticipation of a further rise in u.s. interest rates,
they said traders expected riyal deposits to follow the
recent strong rise in eurodollar rates sparked by fears of a
tighter u.s. monetary policy to halt the dollar's slide.
"there was a wave of panic buying early in the morning as
people tried to cover gaps and build long riyal positions," said
one dealer. as a result, riyal deposits were strongly bid and
traders scrambled for any available offers.
one-way trade focused mainly on the fixed periods but short
dates also rose, dealers said. spot-next and one-week deposits
climbed to 6-5/8, 1/8 pct from 6-3/8, six on sunday.
one-month deposits rose to 6-1/2, 3/8 pct from 6-1/4, six
and three-month deposits climbed to 6-3/4, 5/8 pct from 6-9/16,
7/16. six-month deposits also firmed to 7-1/8, seven pct from
the spot riyal was steady at 3.7500/03 to the dollar after
london gold morning fix highest since october
gold bullion continued to move higher
supported by good general buying and was fixed this morning at
436.50 dlrs, 268.368 stg, an ounce, up from friday's close of
the setting was the highest since october 8 as gold built
on friday's gains, which had been based on the weakness of the
dollar and fears of a trade war between the united states and
it opened slightly firmer at 433.50/434.00 and moved up
steadily during the morning supported by commission house and
dealers said there was resistance around 440.00 but with
sentiment still firm some traders believe the rally may even
take gold as high as 500 dlrs.
platinum was fixed this morning at 583.50 dlrs an ounce, up
from friday's close of 578.50/580.50, and also the highest
borg-warner agrees to buyout by merrill lynch firm
unwanted offer from gaf corp &lt;gaf>, agreed to a 4.23 billion
dlr buyout offer from a company to be formed by &lt;merrill lynch
borg-warner and merrill said yesterday they entered a
definitive merger agreement, under which a subsidiary of the
new company, &lt;av holdings corp>, will begin a 48.50 dlr per
share cash tender offer today for 77.6 mln shares or 89 pct of
the offer will be followed by a merger in which each
remaining share will be converted into 19.75 dlrs cash and
54.25 dlrs principal amount of av holdings junior subordinated
as a result of the merger, borg-warner will become a wholly
owned subsidiary of av holdings. a borg-warner spokeswoman said
members of management do not plan to participate in the
transaction, but they will retain their positions with the
a spokesman for gaf was unavailable for comment. gaf holds
gaf had said it would offer 46 dlrs per share.
borg-warner's spokeswoman said the company still plans to
sell its financial services unit, which includes wells fargo
security guards, and the chilton corp, a credit rating service.
borg-warner has been the focus of takeover speculation for
about a year. corporate raider irwin jacobs last year proposed
a takeover of the firm and until recently held 10 pct of the
stock. following the gaf offer, analysts had calculated breakup
values for the company in the low 50 dlrs per share range and
speculated an offer would have to be sweetened.
in its statement, borg-warner said its board endorsed the
merrill offer and it recommended that shareholders tender their
shares. the board received opinions on the offer from its
advisors, first boston corp and goldman, sachs and co.
james burke, president of merrill lynch capital partners,
said, "we are very pleased to have entered into this transaction
with borg-warner. we are looking forward to working with the
employees of borg-warner and to borg-warner maintaining its
strong presence in the chicago community."
merrill lynch will be the dealer-manager for the offer,
which expires at midnight edt may 8 (0400 gmt, may 9), subject
to conditions, including the completion of necessary financing
the offer is also subject to a minimum 44.25 mln shares, or
51 pct of the outstanding shares, being tendered.
merrill lynch and certain affiliates have committed to
provide 200 mln dlrs in av holdings equity and 870 mln in
subordinated financing and forward underwriting commitments.
merrill lynch said that following discussions with
commercial banks it is confident it can obtain the rest of the
financing required to complete the transaction.
the junior subordinated discount debentures to be issued in
the merger will carry a 13 pct coupon and will begin paying
the debentures will be redeemable at the company's option
for the first six years at 105 pct, during the seventh year at
102.5 pct and after that at 100 pct of the principal amount.
the junior subordinated discount debentures have a maturity
of 20 years and are entitled to a sinking fund commencing in
the 16th year designed to retire 60 pct of the issue before
borg-warner will also redeem all of its outstanding 4.50
dlrs cumulative preferred stock, series a, for 100 dlrs per
share. holders who wish to participate in the offer must first
convert their preferred stock into borg-warner common stock.
the board of borg-warner has also taken steps to redeem its
poison pill or share purchase rights for five cents per right,
u.k. march producer prices rise 0.3 pct
the price index for sales of
manufactured goods in the u.k. rose a provisional, unadjusted
0.3 pct in march after an identical rise in february,
department of trade and industry figures show.
the index for materials and fuel purchased by manufacturing
industry fell a provisional and unadjusted 1.1 pct after a 1.7
the department said the year-on-year rise in producer
prices in march was a provisional 3.7 pct, compared with a
provisional 4.2 pct increase in the year to end-february.
the index for output prices, non-seasonally adjusted, was
put at a provisional 149.7 in march after 149.3 in february.
the index for input prices, also not seasonally adjusted,
was set at 128.2 in march after february's 129.6.
the 1.1 pct fall in input prices between february and march
was mainly due to a seasonal fall in industrial electricity
costs and lower scheduled prices for petroleum products, the
the department said these falls were only partly offset by
a rise in prices of home-produced food manufacturing materials.
the seasonally adjusted index for input prices showed a 0.2
pct rise between february and march.
year-on-year, the input price index was down 0.7 pct in
march after a 2.8 pct drop in february.
statoil seeks share in thai gas field
den norske stats oljeselskap a/s (statoil) &lt;stat.ol>, has told
thai authorities it is interested in taking a 30 pct share in a
big offshore thailand gas field, statoil said.
the field, in the southern sector of the gulf of thailand,
is currently operated by u.s. oil company texas pacific oil co
inc, a unit of canada's seagram co ltd &lt;vo.n>. thailand's state
oil company &lt;petroleum authority thailand> (ptt) also holds a
ptt wants to develop the field and has asked statoil to
consider co-development if the field's licence is renewed.
ptt, according to statoil, is currently negotiating with
texas pacific to buy back the dallas-based oil company's
"ptt must first sort out its problems with texas pacific.
when this is done, we have said we are interested in taking
over a 30 pct share in the field," statoil spokesman willy olsen
statoil, hired by ptt to carry out an independent appraisal
of the field's reserves and propose a development plan, has
estimated the field could be commercially developed at a cost
industry sources said texas pacific has submitted lower
reserve estimates for the field than statoil and shown little
interest in its development. statoil refused to disclose its
upgraded reserve estimate for the field.
the field's reserves could be sold domestically through
thailand's gas distribution network or by converting the gas to
sources would not say which field statoil is considering.
credit commercial de france splits shares
de france has split each of its shares into four to increase
the number of shares on offer when it is privatised at the end
of this month, a company official said.
he told reuters a general assembly had passed a proposal
splitting 10.33 mln shares of 100 francs nominal into around
41.32 mln shares of 25 francs nominal.
market sources have put the total value of ccf's selloff at
between four and five billion francs. the bank said the share
sale price was likely to be announced on april 24, before the
launch of a public flotation offer on april 27.
west german institutes call for early tax cuts
the five leading west german economic
research institutes said the government should do more to
stimulate economic growth and called for early introduction of
in their joint spring report the institutes were divided
about 1987 growth forecasts, with three predicting two pct
expansion and the other two only one pct growth. gross national
product grew 2.4 pct last year.
but the report said all the institutes believed that "more
must be done to produce dynamic growth so that more additional
the institutes said any step which improved basic economic
conditions should be taken as quickly as possible. "from this
point of view, the tax reform planned for 1990 should be
the government plans gross tax reductions of 44 billion
marks as part of the major tax reform. the net tax relief from
the tax reform will amount to 25 billion marks.
however, the institutes criticised the government, not only
for the timing of the reform, but also because the question of
its financing had been left open.
the government has not specified how the remaining 19
billion marks of the tax reduction package will be paid for,
though it has said it wants to cut state subsidies.
the institutes said this lack of clarity from bonn had
caused uncertainty among companies and households as to what
exactly they would receive from the tax reform and urged a
they also said the government should reduce tax
preferences, which would simplify the fiscal system, urged a
restriction of state spending and called for no increase in
the institutes also criticised bonn for increasing
subsidies at a time further reductions had been pledged.
they referred specifically to a doubling of special
writedowns for small and medium sized companies announced in a
package of tax adjustments planned for 1988 and described this
the institutes said total subsidies, including tax
preferences, had reached 80 billion marks in 1985 and risen
further since then. given the scope of these subsidies, it
should be possible "despite ... major political difficulties" to
finance the tax reform by cutting state handouts.
the institutes said that if the government raised value
added tax or other indirect taxes a large portion of the
positive effects resulting from lower taxes would be lost.
the report also noted that the government was progressing
only slowly with its plans to privatise state companies and
said more deregulation was needed. the government had to aim
glaxo pre-tax profit 376 mln stg vs 260 mln in six months to end-december
glaxo pre-tax profit 376 mln stg vs 260 mln in six months to end-december
hillsdown buys bedding companies for 23 mln dlrs
hillsdown holdings plc &lt;hldn.l> said its
christie-tyler ltd unit would buy the european bedding making
interests of simmons co u.s.a., owned by gulf and western
industries inc usa &lt;gw>, for 23 mln dlrs.
the acquisitions include &lt;sleepeeze ltd> in the u.k.,
&lt;compagnie continentale simmons sa> in france and &lt;compagnia
in 1986 the three businesses made pre-tax profit of around
2.5 mln stg on sales of 39 mln stg. net assets being acquired
come to around nine mln stg.
hillsdown shares were unchanged at 266p.
glaxo profits up sharply, dividend raised
pre-tax profit 376 mln stg vs 260 mln
turnover 883 mln vs 686 mln
tax 133 mln vs 94 mln
note - company full name is glaxo holdings plc &lt;glxo.l>.
trading profit 338 mln vs 233 mln
share of profits of associates 14 mln vs seven mln
investment income less interest payable 24 mln vs 20 mln
profit after tax 243 mln vs 166 mln
minority interests two mln vs one mln
extraordianry credit eight mln vs nil
continuing activities 875 mln vs 647 mln
discontinued activities eight mln vs 39 mln
u.k. 111 mln vs 91 mln
europe 299 mln vs 218 mln
north america 334 mln vs 229 mln
central and south america 21 mln vs 20 mln
africa and middle east 29 mln vs 23 mln
south east asia and far east 57 mln vs 47 mln
australasia 24 mln vs 19 mln
anti-peptic ulcerants 414 mln vs 285 mln
systemic antibiotics 112 mln vs 82 mln
respiratory system 183 mln vs 141 mln
takeover battle for dome petroleum begins
a takeover battle began today for
debt-burdened dome petroleum ltd &lt;dmp.mo> as transcanada
pipelines ltd &lt;trp.to> announced a 4.3 billion dlr offer and
dome said it is continuing talks with other possible buyers.
companies mentioned in market speculation as potential
buyers for dome include imperial oil ltd &lt;imo.a> which is 70
pct owned by exxon corp &lt;xon.n>, &lt;pancanadian petroleum ltd>
which is 87 pct owned by the conglomerate canadian pacific ltd
&lt;cp.n> and british petroleum co plc &lt;bp.l>.
along with the transcanada offer, dome has had another
proposal from "a substantial company" and discussions with a
third company which could lead to an offer, dome said in a
the statement confirmed dome received transcanada's bid,
but did not identify the companies involved in talks.
transcanada, canada's largest natural gas pipeline
operator, said it is offering dome a package of cash, common
and preferred shares, and shares in a new subsidiary which
would own and operate dome's assets. transcanada said the offer
is to dome management, not to shareholders.
dome has massive oil and gas landholdings in canada,
totalling 36.1 mln acres of which 7.4 mln have been developed.
it also has tax credits worth about 2.5 billion dlrs.
dome's statement said the transcanada announcement "violated
the terms and spirit of a confidentiality agreement entered
into with prospective purchasers" and was apparently timed to
prevent dome from considering other proposals.
it said the transcanada bid "seems to require favourable and
substantial taxation concessions from the federal and
provincial governments." but dome added that its management and
financial advisers will evaluate all proposals.
transcanada chief financial officer h. neil nichols said he
was surprised at the vehemence of dome's statement and denied
that transcanada was trying to usurp other bids. "i find (dome's
statement) very bothersome. once the board made the decision to
authorise the proposal, it had a legal obligation to announce
it," he said. nichols said he did not know the identity of the
other bidders, or the terms of other offers.
dome common shares closed at 1.13 dlrs on friday on the
toronto stock exchange. the preferred class a stock closed at
5.00 dlrs. common stock traded as high as 25.00 dlrs in 1981.
bank of japan to sell 800 billion yen in bills
the bank of japan will sell 800 billion
yen in deficit financing bills today through 51-day repurchase
agreements maturing june 3 to help absorb a projected money
the operation will raise the outstanding supply of the
bills to a record 4,800 billion yen.
the yield on the bills for sale to banks and securities
houses from money houses will be 3.8999 pct compared with the
two-month commercial bill discount rate today of 3.8750 pct and
the two-month certificate of deposit rate of 4.13/00 pct.
the traders estimated the surplus today at about 1,800
they said it is mainly due to 1,300 billion yen of
government tax allocations to local governments and public
entities and to excessive banking system cash holdings due to
continuous large central bank dollar purchases.
lme clarifies new aluminium contract details
the london metal exchange (lme) has
issued a note clarifying details on its new high grade
aluminium contract, in response to questions from members
following the announcement of the contract, due to start june
all deliverable shapes of aluminium under the high grade
primary aluminium contract (minimum 99.7 pct purity) will also
be deliverable against the standard primary aluminium contract
(min 99.5 pct), the lme said.
sows will not constitute good delivery against the standard
contract until september 1, and 99.5 pct purity sows are not
good delivery and cannot be placed on lme warrant.
the dollar quotation for the high grade contract will be in
multiples of one u.s. dollar but carries may be made at 50
singapore, which is the first port warehouse outside europe
to be used as an lme delivery point, will be used for high
grade metal only and the rent imposed by owners steinweg will
be 1.05 u.s. dlr a tonne per week, the lme said.
the lme board, in response to representation from the
trade, agreed to annul from lme contracts the minimum weight
requirements of 450 kilos for t-bars and 250 kilos for sows,
effective for high grade on june 1 and for standard on july 24.
yield on 91-day sama deposits rises
the yield on 91-day bankers security
deposit accounts issued this week by the saudi arabian monetary
agency (sama) rose to 6.43896 pct from 6.21563 a week ago,
sama lowered the offer price on the 500 mln riyal issue to
98.39844 from 98.45313 last monday. like-dated interbank
deposits were quoted today at 6-3/4, 5/8 pct.
sama offers a total of 1.9 billion riyals in 30, 91 and
180-day accounts to banks in the kingdom each week.
north yemen bought white sugar at tender - trade
north yemen at its weekend tender bought
white sugar from a french operator acting on behalf of a swiss
house at 214.70 dlrs a tonne c and f, traders said.
the amount bought was not immediately available, although
the country had sought 30,000 tonnes of june arrival whites,
u.k. money market given 75 mln stg assistance
the bank of england said it had provided
the money market with 75 mln stg help in the morning session.
this compares with the bank's estimate that the system would
face a shortage of around 400 mln stg today.
the central bank bought bank bills outright comprising two
mln stg in band two at 9-13/16 pct, 15 mln stg in band three at
9-3/4 pct and 58 mln stg in band three at 9-11/16 pct.
japan central bank actively buys dollars in tokyo
the bank of japan actively bought dollars
here in early afternoon trade at around 142.20 yen, dealers
the central bank had placed buy orders at that level and
prevented the dollar from falling when it came under heavy
selling pressure from investment trusts and trading houses,
however, the intervention failed to boost the u.s. currency
significantly from the 142.20 yen level, they added.
the dollar was trading around its midday rate of 142.30
yen. it had opened here at 141.85 yen.
currency moves may be hurting world trade
challenging the entrenched view of policy makers of the group
of seven industrialised nations that relative currency rates
are the key to smoothing world trade problems.
senior japanese, u.s. and european officials in tokyo say
they are at a loss to fully explain the data, for if currencies
are the key they ask, why then are are u.s. exports to japan
what if manipulating currencies and driving the dollar down
made world trade problems worse rather than solving them,
fulfilling federal reserve chairman paul volcker's forecast of
u.s.-japan trade has declined even after a 40 pct dollar
fall against the yen since the september 1985 group of five
the lower dollar ought to have made u.s. exports 40 pct
more competitive in japan. the officials, most of them
economists, can offer no objective reason why they are not.
worse, how are european community sales to japan rising
rapidly when the european currency unit has until now declined
only 11 pct against the yen.?
last week's g-7 meeting in washington has been widely
interpreted as a sign from the policy makers that the dollar
must go lower. so worst of all, what if volcker is correct?
at a loss to give an objective explanation, officials can
only offer explanations which tend to be highly subjective.
"i don't know and i don't think anyone knows," said hugh
richardson, acting head of the ec delegation in tokyo.
"what i do know is that community exporters are making a
hell of an effort in this market. if you make an effort, there
is money to be made in japan," he added.
but u.s. officials and businessmen are convinced low u.s.
exports to japan are japan's fault. they cite restrictive trade
practices, protected japanese trade sectors, such as
agriculture, and non-tariff barriers, such as unreasonable
checking and customs procedures for car imports.
publicly, japanese officials remain conciliatory in the
face of what they see as u.s. aggression. in private, they
blame u.s. industry for being uncompetitive.
"we see it that way, but we don't like to seem arrogant,"
said a senior official, who declined to be named. "we like to
refrain from accusing them of not making enough effort."
industrialists such as eishiro saito, chairman of the
keidanren business group, and sony corp chairman akio morita
repeatedly accuse foreign firms of not making enough effort to
understand japan's markets, and some foreigners agree. "the real
issue is the inability of major sectors of american and
european industry to compete not only internationally but even
in their home markets," peter huggler, president of interallianz
bank zurich, told a recent conference in switzerland.
saudi arabia seeking rbd palm olein
saudi arabia is in the market for 4,000
tonnes of refined bleached deodorised palm olein for june 1/10
the london based trade journal "metal
bulletin's" average producer price of good ordinary brand zinc
for week ended april 10 is 790.00 dlrs per tonne.
u.k. producer prices seen moved by technicalities
u.k. producer price data for march were
roughly as expected after taking into account technical factors
which affected the year-on-year outcome, economic analysts
the figures showed a 0.3 pct provisional, non-seasonally
adjusted rise in output prices in march, unchanged from
february and close to the average for the last six months.
the year-on-year rise was put at 3.7 pct, down from 4.2 pct
but chris tinker, economist at brokerage house phillips and
drew, said the drop in the year-on-year rate mainly reflected a
rise in excise duties which affected the index in march last
he cautioned that it was dangerous to read too much into
the monthly figure, adding that a rise of only 0.2 pct in april
would take the year-on-year rise back above 4.2 pct.
analysts also noted that a drop in manufacturers' input
prices was almost entirely due to anticipated seasonal factors
such as a fall in industrial electricity costs.
duncan squire of lloyds merchant bank said the figures were
slightly disappointing in that the strengthening of sterling
had not yet reduced input prices as much as expected.
both he and tinker said this factor should help keep input
costs down over the next few months, although tinker added that
last year's fall in oil prices is now about to drop out of the
year-on-year comparisons and is likely to lead to a return to
rises in the index rather than falls.
bangemann rejects call for early tax cuts
bangemann indirectly rejected a call from the country's leading
economic research institutes for early introduction of a major
tax reform involving gross tax cuts of 44 billion marks.
in a statement reacting to the five institutes' joint
spring report, bangemann said that as far as the call for
bringing forward the 1990 tax reform was concerned --
"the government points out that the positive effects for
growth of its policy of consolidation (cutting the budget
deficit) must not be allowed to be endangered."
bangemann also recalled that the scope of tax cuts planned
for 1988 had already been increased.
three institutes predicted two pct economic growth in 1987,
with exports falling by 0.5 pct. the other two saw only one pct
growth and said exports would fall 2.5 pct.
bangemann said "the government, agreeing with the majority,
sees no reason for the extraordinarily pessimistic estimate for
he said there was reason to believe that export demand
would start to rise in the course of the year, partly because
of a further increase in world trade.
italian gdp rose 2.4 pct in 1986 fourth quarter
at 1980 prices, rose 2.4 pct in the fourth quarter of 1986,
compared with the same period in 1985, national statistics
istat said in a statement that gdp growth in fourth quarter
1986 was zero compared with the preceding quarter. italy's
budget ministry said last month that 1986 gdp rose 2.7 pct in
imports in the fourth quarter totalled 26,361 billion lire,
down 1.4 pct from the 1985 fourth quarter and down 6.6 pct from
the third 1986 quarter, istat said.
istat said exports totaled 23,190 billion lire in the
fourth quarter, down 4.1 pct from the comparable 1985 quarter
and down 6.7 pct from the third quarter in 1986.
fixed investments were 23,438 billion lire in the fourth
quarter, down 0.7 pct from the preceding quarter and up 1.1 pct
g-7 seems worried markets ignore coordination
nations appear deeply worried that financial markets have
ignored their efforts to coordinate policies, which they
believe they strengthened in talks last week.
monetary sources said officials were exasperated that the
markets, which drove the dollar rapidly lower and severely
disrupted bond and stock markets too, did not take heed of the
policy commitments of the group of seven -- the united states,
japan, west germany, france, britain, italy and canada.
treasury secretary james baker went out of his way to
reassure markets of his commitment to a stable dollar with a
statement, and french finance minister edouard balladur
underscored that by saying: "i don't believe at all that the
west german finance minister gerhard stoltenberg said the
dollar's latest rapid descent "involves the risk -- now already
a tangible threat -- of a new strong surge of inflation,
leading to a renewed rise in interest rates."
but there were signs too, that while policymakers feared
the market uproar, they seemed to accept there was little they
could do until the economic picture changed, and currencies
settled into a stable pattern as a result.
nor did there seem to be any enthusiasm at last week's
semi-annual meetings of the imf and the world bank for higher
u.s. interest rates as the best way to curb the dollar's rapid
descent. that distaste stems in part from fears of recession.
outgoing deputy treasury secretary richard darman told
television interviewers he did not think a policy of driving
the dollar down would solve the u.s. trade deficit.
"it would slow growth in germany and japan which would
adversely affect our trade balance and ultimately it would
drive interest rates up here which would throw us, if not
(into) recession, into slower growth," he said.
asked if higher u.s. interest rates would stabilize the
dollar, balladur said: "when a currency is maintained
artificially high, by artificially high interest rates, it is
and resorting to higher interest rates could lead to
acknowledging the dollar's latest slide was now a fact of
life, balladur said, "there may be adjustments of course in one
or other currencies, this is not a fixed rate system."
but federal reserve board chairman paul volcker said he
might rein in credit if the dollar's slide deepens.
u.s. monetary sources also said washington wanted it
understood by markets the seven's commitments were genuine.
"the united states and the six major industrial countries
are fully committed to implementing our undertakings in these
darman said baker had been misinterpreted by markets which
wrongly believed earlier remarks suggested he wanted a further
decline in the dollar. baker, darman said, was committed to
last week's statement from the seven reaffirmed a february
22 agreement in paris in which the reagan administration agreed
to reach a budget deficit compromise with congress and to fight
west germany and japan, meanwhile, agreed to stimulate
domestic demand and lead a global upturn.
ministers believed the paris pact was bolstered by japan's
promise of a 35 billion dlr supplementary budget.
the sources said they believed baker saw it as a major
action. but the seven seem to accept their commitment to stable
currencies applied to today's exchange rates and not those at
the time of the paris agreement, when the dollar stood higher.
the paris accord said, "currencies (are) within ranges
broadly consistent with underlying economic fundamentals, given
the policy commitments summarized in this statement."
now they accept the dollar's lower level, especially
against the yen, as hard reality that is nonetheless consistent
with the agreement. "the ministers and governors reaffirmed the
view that around current levels their currencies are within
ranges broadly consistent with fundamentals," last week's
monetary sources said policymakers understood markets were
focusing on instability created by the gap between the u.s.
trade deficit and the surpluses of west germany and japan
rather than prospective policy changes. european monetary
sources said bonn was still unconvinced that washington meant
business with its commitment to cut the budget deficit.
institutes see no west german recession
the five leading west german economic
research institutes, which have revised down their forecasts
for 1987 growth, do not predict a recession in west germany,
the institutes were divided in their spring report on
forecasts for 1987, with three predicting two pct growth and
two seeing only one pct expansion. growth was 2.4 pct in 1986.
schmahl, presenting the report at a news conference, said,
"none of the institutes reckons with a recession or with the
beginning of a recession." he added, however, that exports
remained the weak point of the economy .
schmahl also said west germany would have to expect further
encroachments of foreign goods onto its markets.
arthur krumper of munich's ifo institute, which with the
diw of west berlin had presented the more pessimistic view of
the economy, said, "the braking effects (on the economy)
produced by external factors will remain considerable for most
deposit guaranty corp &lt;deps> 1st qtr net
shr 1.11 dlrs vs 1.10 dlrs
shr diluted 1.03 dlrs vs 1.02 dlrs
computer associates &lt;ca> starts bpi &lt;bpii> bid
said it has started its previously-announced 1.92 dlr per share
tender offer for all shares of bpi systems inc.
in a newspaper advertisement, the company said the offer,
which has been approved by the bpi board and is to be followed
by a merger at the same price, is conditioned on receipt of at
least 1,813,742 shares.  the offer and withdrawal rights expire
in addition to shares sought in the tender, shareholders of
bpi owning 1,951,720 shares or 34.6 pct have agreed to sell
their shares to computer associates for the tender price.
king world productions inc &lt;kwp> 2nd qtr feb 28
shr 21 cts vs eight cts
revs 56.4 mln vs 23.2 mln
shr 57 cts vs 32 cts
revs 137.7 mln vs 76.0 mln
year to end-december shr 76.7p vs 67.7p
div 17p making 23p vs 21p
pretax profit 127.0 mln stg vs 116.9 mln
turnover 1.10 billion vs 947.2 mln
tax 25.0 mln vs 26.3 mln
note - company full name is blue circle industries plc
&lt;bcil.l>. company said it proposes one-for-one capitalisation
gross profit 390.9 mln vs 321.6 mln
distribution costs 215.6 mln vs 177.6 mln
administrative expenses 65.1 mln vs 58.9 mln
other operating income 5.3 mln vs 11.0 mln
share of profits of related companies 50.0 mln vs 58.1 mln
operating profit 165.5 mln vs 154.2 mln
net interest payable 33.6 mln vs 32.2 mln
exceptional items 4.9 mln debit vs 5.1 mln debit
minorities 3.4 mln vs 6.9 mln
extraordinary items after tax 39.5 mln vs 4.2 mln
u.k. 37.7 mln vs 20.5 mln
u.s. 27.5 mln vs 22.8 mln
mexico 15.0 mln vs 20.7 mln
australasia 15.7 mln vs 13.2 mln
africa 12.0 mln vs 12.6 mln
crazy eddie &lt;crzy> may make acquisition
crazy eddie inc said it is
negotiating for the possible acquisition of benel distributors
ltd, which operates crazy eddie record and tape asylums in all
it said the acquisition would probably also include
affiliate disc-o-mat inc, which operates a number of record and
tape stores in the new york metropolitan area.
crazy eddie &lt;crzy> sets defensive rights
crazy eddie inc said its board has
adopted a defensive shareholder rights plan and said it has
received "friendly inquiries" on its acquisition.
it said under the plan, shareholdrs of record as of april
21 will receive a right to purchase under certain circumstances
at a price of 42 dlrs 0.01 preferred share for each common
share held.  the rights will expire april nine.
the company said the rights would be exercisable 20
business days after a party were to acquire 20 pct or more of
crazy eddie common stock or announce a tender or exchange offer
that would result in ownership of 30 pct or more.
crazy eddie said if a party owning 20 pct or more of its
stock were to merge into it or if a party were to acquire 40
pct or more of crazy eddie stock, right holders other than the
acquiring party would be entitled to acquire common shares or
other securities or assets with a market value equal to twice
if after a party acquired 20 pct or more of its stock crazy
eddie were acquired or 50 pct of its earnings power or assets
sold, rightholders other than the acquirer would be entitled to
buy shares of the acquirer's common stock worth twice the
rights' exercise price, the company said.
crazy eddie said if a party were to acquire 30 pct or more
of its common stock and then fail to acquire crazy eddie within
180 days thereafter, rightholders would be entitled to exchange
their crazy eddie common stock for subordinated notes of crazy
eddie maturing either one year or, above a certain dollar limt,
crazy eddie said adoption of the plan is not in response to
any known effort to acquire control of it.  but the company
said it has become aware of some "possible accumulations" of
its stock has has received some "friendly inquiries."
six killed in south african mine
six workers were killed and four
injured in an undeground rock fall at south africa's second
largest gold mine today, the mine owners said.
it was the third major mine accident in the country in less
thirty four workers died in methane gas explosion at a coal
zambia's kwacha falls at weekly auction
the zambian kwacha fell at this week's
foreign exchange auction to 18.75 kwacha to the dollar from
last week's 16.95, the bank of zambia said.
the rate was the lowest since the auctions resumed two
weeks ago under a new two-tier exchange rate system worked out
with the world bank and international monetary fund.
the bank of zambia said it received 370 bids, ranging from
13.00 to 20.75 kwacha, for the six mln dlrs on offer. one
hundred and thirty-five bids were successful.
a british high commission spokesman said britain would put
eight mln stg into the auction at a rate of one mln a week as
soon as zambia reached a full agreement with the imf.
the money could be spent only on goods produced and
supplied by british firms, excluding luxuries and defence
u.s. senate leader calls for interest rate cuts
lloyd bentsen (d-tex.) called on major industrial countries to
make a pledge at the coming economic summit in venice to cut
"i think at the summit meeting in venice what we ought to be
trying to do is to get the other major industrial nations that
are involved to bring interest rates down, say, one pct,"
bentsen told nbc television's "meet the press."
bentsen said coordinated rate cuts could take "billions off
the debt service of the latin countries" and help ease
protectionist pressures in the industrial countries.
bentsen also south korea and taiwan should be pressured to
revalue their currencies in relation to the u.s. dollar.
"you take the taiwanese, with an enormous capital surplus,
enormous trade surplus, and we've had very little cooperation
departing deputy treasury secretary richard darman told the
same television network he agreed that the u.s. dollar had not
fallen enough against the currencies of some countries.
"i think that more does have to be done there in
negotiations with the countries involved, the so-called nics
darman said such negotiations with newly industrialized
bentsen predicted congress and the white house would agree
on a fiscal 1988 budget that would raise between 18 and 22
the texas senator said a series of excise taxes would be
considered by congress, including an extension of the telephone
tax and new levies on liquor and cigarettes.
bentsen said he supported an oil import fee, but that it
would not happen without president reagan's support.
darman called for a "top level negotiation" between the white
house and congress on a budget compromise that would include
asset sales, some excise taxes, cuts in middle-class
entitlement programs, "a reasonable, steady rate of growth in
defense" and reform of the budget process.
offer for dome may short-circuit its debt talks
a 3.22 billion dlr offer for dome
petroleum ltd &lt;dmp.mo> by transcanada pipelines ltd &lt;trp.to>
may short-circuit dome's restructuring plan and open the door
for more takeover bids, oil analysts said.
dome is trying to get approval for a plan to refinance debt
of more than 4.5 billion dlrs by july 1, 1987, when an interim
debt plan that allowed the canadian oil and gas firm to defer
substantial payments to creditors will expire.
analysts said transcanada's bid signals dome's debtholders
that an alternative exists to dome's debt plan.
dome announced its plan to 56 major creditors as well as
public noteholders in march after several months of delicate
transcanada's proposal "amounts to a quasi debt
restructuring," oil analyst doug gowland of brown baldwin nisker
calgary-based dome's restructuring plan would allow
creditors to convert debt to common shares under a formula yet
to be negotiated. payments on remaining debt would be linked to
cash flow generated by assets pledged against the debt.
"the weakness of the whole debt-refinancing proposal is that
even with approval of creditors, there is no assurance that
dome will in fact be able to repay all of its debt obligations,"
said wilf gobert, an oil analyst for peters and co ltd in
transcanada's announcement came as a surprise since dome
was waiting for responses from creditors on its proposed
the transcanada proposal could open the bidding for dome
since other potential buyers were probably waiting for lenders
to agree to a restructuring, he added.
"i would think that the debtholders would want to entertain
any and all offers (for dome)," gobert said.
dome spokesman david annesley said in new york that
transcanada's announcement could be seen as an attempt to fix
the bidding price for dome and an effort to preclude other
possible buyers from making an offer. "by drawing attention to
us in our discussions, it means that others may be a little
reluctant to come forward," he said.
dome does not consider transcanada's proposal a formal
offer because the pipeline utility's announcement breached a
confidential agreement between the two companies, he said.
dome responded to the statement by suspending discussions
with transcanada in order to pursue talks with other
unidentified parties. however, dome said its management and
financial advisers would evaluate all proposals, including
gowland said transcanada's offer is probably a fair price
for the company's 36.1 mln acres of oil and gas land holdings.
however, he said not enough financial details are known
about dome's debt restructuring to compare the value of
sosnoff raises bid for caesars world &lt;caw>
investor martin t. sosnoff said he has
raised his offer for caesars world inc shares to 32 dlrs each
from 28 dlrs and has reduced the number of shares he is seeking
to 29.1 mln from all those not already owned.
in a newspaper advertisement, sosnoff said the bid by his
mts acquisition corp, withdrawal rights and the proration
period will now expire june 19 unless extended. the offer had
been scheduled to expire may 15. in late march, sosnoff said he
had received a "negligible" number of shares in response to the
offer, which had been rejected by caesars as inadequate.
sosnoff already owns about four mln of caesars' 30 mln
common shares now outstanding, or a 13.3 pct interest on a
last week, caesars' board approved a recapitalization plan
as an alternative to the sosnoff offer under which shareholders
would receive a special dividend of 25 dlrs per share, subject
to approval by shareholders at a special meeting to be held in
the company planned to borrow 200 mln dlrs and sell 800 mln
dlrs in debt to finance the payout.
sosnoff said in the newspaper advertisement that the
amended offer is conditioned on receipt of enough shares to
give him a majority interest on a fully diluted basis and on
the arrangement of financing, as well as to approvals by new
he said the tender would be the first step in acquiring all
of caesars' shares and if successful would be followed by a
sosnoff said later in a statement that the 29.1 mln shares
he is now seeking, together with the 4,217,675 shares he owns,
would give him a 92.4 pct interest on a fully diluted basis.
he said he still has received only a "negligible" number of
shares in response to his tender.
in a letter to caesars' chairman henry gluck included in
the statement, sosnoff said gluck had again refused, on april
8, to meet with him, even though he had said he was willing to
increase the price of his offer.
sosnoff said the financing for the offer is almost fully in
sosnoff said painewebber group inc &lt;pwj> has now delivered
to him commitments to purchase up to 475 mln dlrs of increasing
dividend cumulative exchangeable preferred stock of mts holding
corp, an indirect parent corporation of mts acquisition.
he said marine midland banks inc &lt;mm>, which leads a
syndicate that has provided commitments for a 500 mln dlr
margin facility, believes it will be able to arrange for
further commitments under the margin facility to advance up to
an additional 25 mln dlrs that may be needed to permit the
purchase of shares under the offer.
sosnoff said under the merger that would follow his tender,
each of the 2,750,000 caesars shares not covered by the offer,
or 7.6 pct on a fully diluted basis, would be converted into
series a preferred stock valued at 32 dlrs per shareby an
he said "to the extent that fewer than 29,100,000 sdhares
are purchased in the offer, the stockholders would receive a
combination of cash and series a preferred stock having a value
of 32 dlrs per share of caesars."
sosnoff said he believes terms of his offer are superior to
sosnoff said he will be meeting this week with gaming
officials in nevada in an effort to expedite the investigatory
process required for regulatory approval, a process that it
he said his offer has been extended based on the likely
he said he intends to further extend the offer if the
approval process is not completed by the expiration date.
compact video inc &lt;cvsi.o> year loss
shr loss 67 cts vs loss two cts
net loss 3,721,000 vs loss 107,000
revs 155.7 mln vs 24.2 mln
note: results for 12 months ended dec 31, 1986, and eight
months ended dec 31 1985. because of the acquisition of brooks
drug in september 1986 and the company's change of fiscal year,
prior-year results are not comparable, compact video explained.
neworld bank for savings &lt;nwor> 1st qtr net
oper shr 45 cts vs 26 cts
note: 1986 net excludes 842,000 dlr tax credit.
usair to buy 55 pct of 17.0 mln piedmont shares tendered
usair to buy 55 pct of 17.0 mln piedmont shares tendered
pakistan confirms kenya tea import investigation
cla, has begun an enquiry into imports of tea from kenya and
the trade imbalance between the two countries, cla chairman
he told reuters by telephone that importers liptons and
brooke bond had been asked to supply data to the authority and
the cla would then report back to the commerce ministry,
which had requested the enquiry. husain said no date had yet
been set for the hearing and declined to give further details
industry sources told reuters reports that the companies'
tea import licences had been suspended were incorrect.
portuguese economy remains buoyant despite crisis
enjoying one of its most buoyant periods in more than a decade,
may now be strong enough to shrug off the country's latest
but the april 3 ousting of prime minister anibal cavaco
silva's government could slow economic reforms and investment
as portugal continues to adapt to membership in the european
community, which it joined in january last year, they said.
cavaco silva's minority social democratic party, psd, was
toppled in a parliamentary censure vote by left-wing parties.
the centre-right administration had made economic growth
reform a priority in its 17 months in office.
in 1986, portugal's economy grew four pct, its current
account surplus swelled to more than one billion dlrs and
inflation fell to 10 pct, from 20 pct in 1985.
analysts and businessmen said the prospects of instability
were worrying but they felt the foundations for continued
growth had not been badly shaken.
"the economy has developed a certain self-confidence that is
now less dependent on the political situation," said fritz
haser, economics professor at universidade livre, lisbon.
"the market doesn't see this as a real crisis yet," economist
jorge braga de macedo told reuters.
businessmen have identified political instability over the
last 13 years as one of the biggest obstacles to lasting
the psd administration was the 16th formed since the 1974
portugal's developing stock markets, however, remain
buoyant. brokers and unit trust managers said the recent surge
in economic confidence under the psd rule was still largely
investment grew nearly 10 pct in 1986 and a bank of
portugal forecast, released on the day the psd government fell,
predicted the pace of investment and overall economic growth
would remain at similar levels this year.
but analysts said the crisis interrupted current policies
soares, who is expected to announce a decision by the end
of the month, can either call early elections or form a new
government from parties in the existing left wing-dominated
many businessmen said they strongly favoured quick
elections as the best solution. "there is a good chance that a
majority government could result from early elections,"
confederation of portuguese industry (cip) president pedro
he said they were optimistic this could mean the
continuation in the near future of liberalisation policies
the left-wing parties favour a parliamentary solution, but
the psd said it wants an early election in which opinion polls
say they could win an overall majority.
a psd majority would also open the way for more
wide-ranging reforms, such as relaxation of labour laws and
possible denationalisation of industry, the analysts said.
cavaco silva has accused the left-wing opposition parties
the left-wingers said portugal's positive economic results
were more the product of favourable international conditions
such as cheaper oil and raw material imports, than of psd
merrill lynch first qtr shr one dlr vs 85 cts
merrill lynch first qtr shr one dlr vs 85 cts
merrill lynch and co &lt;mer> 1st qtr net
shr primary one dlr vs 85 cts
shr diluted 97 cts vs 81 cts
net 108.6 mln vs 86.8 mln
rev 2.70 billion vs 2.17 billion
corona &lt;icr.to> favors royex &lt;rgm.to> offer
its board of directors believes that terms of royex gold mining
corp's previously announced offer are fair and reasonable, but
it decided it will make no recommendation on the offer to its
royex on march 31 offered to buy four mln corona shares.
for each corona share it offered four dlrs cash, one series b
share of royex, one series c share of royex and one share
purchase warrant. it also bid for all corona warrants expiring
said it has agreed in principle to merge with independence
holding co into a new company to be called safco international
it said each south atlantic share would be exchanged for
one safco share and each independence share for 2.822 safco
independence now owns about 40 pct of south atlantic's 9.8
south atlantic said said its chairman and chief executive
officer sheldon s. gordon would have the same posts with safco
and independence president ronald g. strackbein would be
the company said the transaction is subject to execution of
definitive agreements, the receipt of fairness opinions from
investment banks and approval by boards and shareholders of
both companies.  it said proxy materials are expected to be
maioled this quarter.   both south atlantic and independence
home federal upper east tennessee &lt;hfet> 1st qtr
shr 47 cts vs not given
note: company went public in fourth quarter of 1986.
home federal savings and loan association of upper east
the u.s. feeder steer price, or usfsp,
as posted by the cme is calculated by cattle fax and represents
the price used for cash settlement of the cme feeder cattle
the usfsp is a seven-calendar-day average of feeder steer
prices from 27 states, based on auction and direct country
sales for feeder steers that weigh between 600 and 800 lbs and
are estimated to grade between 60 and 80 pct choice when fed to
columbia gas &lt;cg> seeks contract cost recovery
corp said it made an abbreviated, streamlined filing with the
federal energy regulatory commission to recover a portion if
its costs of renegotiating high-cost gas purchase contracts.
recently, the columbia gas system inc pipeline subsidiary
said, ferc denied on procedural grounds and without prejudice a
proposal to include these costs in the company's most recent
purchased gas adjustment -- or pga -- filing.
noting it has has asked for a rehearing on the denial
ruling, columbia gas said it would withdraw its alternative
filing if the commission grantes its request for a rehearing to
include the contract renegotiation costs in its pga or
consolidates this issue in the pipeline's general rate filing
and permit recovery, subject to refund, effective april one.
the company said the alternative filing seeks to recover
about 79 mln dlrs a year through the pipeline's non-gas sales
commodity rates. this annual amortization amount is based on
recovery of about 653 mln drls over an 8-1/4 year period,
columbia gas said the filing would increase the pipeline
commodity rates by 15.74 cts per mln btu to 2.95 dlrs per mln.
the company said it orginially sought to include these
costs in its pga since the payments to products resulted in
almost five billion dlrs in prospective price relief and were
not related to take-or-pay buyout costs.
it explained this interpretation was based on ferc's april
10, 1985, statement of policy which said that only take-or-pay
buyout costs must be recovered through a general rate filing
as a result of renegotiating contracts for high-cost gas,
columbia gas said, it has been able to reduce the average price
paid for gas purchased from southwest producers to 1.96 dlrs
per mln btu in december 1986 from 3.64 dlrs per mln in april
the pipeline said southwestern producers account for 46 pct
of its total available gas supply this year.
hungary raises prices in effort to curb deficit
increases for a range of food and consumer products as part of
its efforts to curb a soaring budget deficit.
the official mti news agency said the government decided
consumer price subsidies had to be cut to reduce state
spending. from today the price of meat will rise by an average
18 pct and that of beer and spirits by 10 pct, mti said.
the measures are also aimed at cooling an overheated
economy, and could help dampen hungarians' appetite for
imported western goods which consume increasingly expensive
the diplomats also said, however, that they did not expect
the kind of social unrest that followed sharp price rises in
other east bloc states, notably poland.
mti said consumer goods will also become more expensive,
with the price of refrigerators rising some five pct. it also
announced a number of measures to ease hardship, including
p.h. glatfelter co says it will buy ecusta corp for 149 mln dlrs in cash
p.h. glatfelter co says it will buy ecusta corp for 149 mln dlrs in cash
family health systems inc &lt;fhsy> 2nd qtr feb 28
shr profit one ct vs nil
net profit 74,000 vs profit 10,000
avg shrs 10 mln vs nine mln
shr loss nil vs loss one ct
net loss 16,000 vs loss 90,000
international business machines corp &lt;ibm> net
shr 1.30 dlrs vs 1.65 dlrs
net 785 mln vs 1.02 billion
gross income 10.68 billion vs 10.13 billion
avg shrs 604.6 mln vs 615.6 mln
note: pretax net 1.34 billion vs 1.83 billion.
sales 6.50 billion vs 6.10 billion, maintenance gross
income 1.95 billion vs 1.77 billion, program products gross
income 1.40 billion vs 1.15 billion and rentals and other
services 825 mln vs 1.10 billion.
usair &lt;u> reports final proration factor
usair group inc said, in announcing
the final proration factor for its tender offer for piedmont
aviation inc &lt;pie>, that 17.0 mln shares, or 90 pct of the
usair said it has purchased and will pay for 9.3 mln
shares, representing about 55 pct of those tendered.
the number of british gold articles
hallmarked during the first quarter of this year rose by more
than 11 pct on the corresponding period last year, figures
released by the assay offices of great britain show.
more than 2.5 mln british items were hallmarked during the
quarter, up 11.1 pct on the same year ago period. the four
assay offices also marked 832,222 foreign gold articles, up 2.5
in weight terms the 7.19 mln grams of british gold assayed
was a 15.3 pct increase, while the 2.95 mln grams of foreign
gold represented a rise of 3.1 pct.
british silver goods assayed totalled 698,132, an increase
of 6.2 pct but only 78,457 foreign items were marked, a fall of
a total of 10,968 kilos of silver were assayed, an 11.1 pct
the number of platinum items marked fell 12.5 pct to 1,785,
while in weight terms the total slipped 8.1 pct to 9,849 grams.
a spokesman for the assay offices of great britain said he
was particularly encouraged to see the percentage increase for
swiss sight deposits fall 4.64 billion francs
sight deposits of commercial banks at
the swiss national bank fell 4.64 billion swiss francs to 7.88
billion in the first 10 days of april, the national bank said.
foreign exchange reserves rose by 9.4 mln francs to 33.12
sight deposits are an important measure of money market
the national bank said banks repaid around 5.8 billion
francs of traditional central bank credit taken out to meet
their end-of-quarter liquidity requirements. this was partially
bank notes in circulation fell 440.2 mln francs to 24.48
billion while other deposits on call at the national bank --
mainly government funds -- fell 840.5 mln francs to 941.5 mln.
u.k. money market given further 68 mln stg help
the bank of england said it provided the
market with a further 68 mln stg assistance this afternoon,
bringing its total assistance on the day to 143 mln stg.
shortly before, the bank said it had revised its estimate
of the shortage up to 450 mln stg from the earlier forecast of
during the afternoon, the bank bought 22 mln stg of band
two bank bills at 9-13/16 pct and two mln stg of local
authority bills plus 44 mln stg of bank bills in band four at
9-11/16 pct. these rates were in all cases unchanged from
goodyear &lt;gt> predicts first quarter net
goodyear tire and rubber co said it
expects to report earnings from continuing operations of over
one dlr per share on 71.3 mln average shares outstanding.
in last year's first quarter the company lost 60.0 mln dlrs
or 55 cts per share on 108.4 mln shares outstanding, after a
110.8 mln dlr writedown of oil reserves of its celeron corp
goodyear said it will report first quarter results april 27.
goodyear chairman robert e. mercer also told the annual
meeting that unless there is a major downturn in the economy,
it expects to work its debt down to normal levels in three
years through its restructuring and cash flow from improved
the company set up its restructuring program to fend off a
hostile takeover attempt by sir james goldsmith.  as part of
the restructuring, goodyear executed a major stock buyback
program that resulted in an increase in its debt.
traders and commission house representatives are guesstimating
today's hog slaughter at about 280,000 to 300,000 head versus
294,000 week ago and 303,000 a year ago.
cattle slaughter is guesstimated at about 120,000 to
126,000 head versus 120,000 week ago and 124,000 a year ago.
trade issues straining ec's patience with japan
community are starting to run out of patience with japan which
they believe has repeatedly promised major initiatives to open
its market to imports, but as often made only minor moves.
diplomatic sources here said several recent actions by ec
countries bear witness to a new disillusionment with the
willingness, or at least the ability, of the japanese
government to reduce its massive trade surplus with the ec.
however, they said an all-out trade war may be far off, as
ec states know they would suffer almost as much as japan.
senior ec diplomats gave a generally favourable reaction to
an ec executive commission proposal under which the ec could
raise tariffs on a range of japanese products if the u.s.
carries out a threat to make a similar move on april 17.
the ec tariffs, which would involve renouncing obligations
entered into with the world trade body gatt, would be designed
to stop a diversion of exports to the ec market from that of
the diplomats were meeting as tokyo announced that the ec's
trade deficit with japan reached a record 2.13 billion dlrs in
march, up from 1.94 billion in february.
ec could decide on japan trade moves in late may
effectively given japan six weeks to take moves to open its
market to imports before it decides on possible tough
retaliatory trade measures, ec diplomats said.
they said ec foreign ministers will meet on may 25 and 26
to review the state of trade relations between the two sides.
the ec executive commission was asked by representatives of
member states on friday to propose a renunciation of some ec
pledges to the world trade body, gatt, unless there are
"adequate and early measures to open the japanese market."
such a renunciation would be the first step to imposing
stiff increases in duties, or quantitative limits, on japanese
the diplomats said it was unlikely that the issue would be
discussed in detail at the next meeting of ec foreign ministers
on april 27 and 28 in luxembourg as time was needed to prepare
they said the commission has powers to take some limited
action before getting ministerial approval to prevent japanese
exports of electrical, photographic and other goods being
diverted to europe following of possible u.s. tariff moves.
in may, the ministers are also likely to discuss how to
prevent japan from getting an extra trading advantage as a
result of spain and portugal joining the bloc, which obliges
them gradually to reduce tariffs on many industrial goods.
japan's trade surplus with the community has grown
steadily, registering a record 2.13 billion dlrs in march.
has reached an agreement to acquire all the capital stock of
&lt;ecusta corp> for 149,177,857 dlrs in cash.
glatfelter, a printing and writing paper maker, said ecusta
operates an uncoded three sheet and light-weight specialty
paper mill in pisgah forest, n.c. the mill produces and
converts paper products used by the doemstic and foreign
glatfelter said it expects to close the deal by may 31.
ncr corp 1st qtr shr 65 cts vs 51 cts
ncr corp 1st qtr shr 65 cts vs 51 cts
first marathon &lt;fms.a.to> plans stock split
first marathon inc said it planned a
two-for-one stock split, to be effective on shareholders'
approval at the june 4 annual meeting.
the financial services company said it also completed the
previously reported 29.6 mln dlr private placement of 1.5 mln
non-voting preferred shares convertible one-for-one into
u.s. bancorp &lt;usbc> 1st qtr net
shr 66 cts vs 57 cts
net 20.0 mln vs 17.1 mln
avg shrs 30.3 mln vs 30.0 mln
ibm &lt;ibm> has higher shipments, costs in qtr
corp said shipments and revenues were higher in the first
quarter, but net earnings fell 22.8 pct in part due to higher
ibm said net income fell to 785 mln dlrs or 1.30 dlrs a
share from 1.02 billion dlrs or 1.65 dlrs on about 1.8 pct
while total sales and income rose 5.5 pct to 10.68 billion
dlrs from 10.13 billion dlrs, costs and expenses rose 12.1 pct
to 9.61 billion dlrs from 8.57 billion in the quarter, the
the company said it continues to take actions to make it
more competitive, including cost and expense reduction
"although the worldwide economic situation remains
unsettled, there are some encouraging signs in our business,"
"in addition to the increase in first quarter shipments, we
have announced new offerings in our large processor and
personal computing product lines," it said.
"we have yet to fully benefit from our recent product
announcements, retirement incentives and other resource
balancing measures, and we expect these actions will have a
more significant impact as 1987 progresses," the company added.
it said it expects more than 12,000 u.s. employees to take
advantage of the retirement incentives announced last year.
pretax earnings fell 27 pct to 1.34 billion dlrs from 1.83
billion, ibm said. pretax margins slipped to 12.5 pct in 1987
from 18.1 pct in 1986, it said.
rotterdam grain handler says port balance rose
graan elevator mij, gem, said its
balance in port of grains, oilseeds and derivatives rose to
146,000 tonnes on april 11 from 111,000 a week earlier after
arrivals of 404,000 tonnes and discharges of 369,000 tonnes
the balance comprised 21,000 tonnes of grains plus oilseeds
this week's estimated arrivals total 274,000 tonnes, of
which 71,000 are grains/oilseeds and 203,000 derivatives.
the figures cover around 95 pct of rotterdam traffic in the
lindberg corp &lt;lind> 1st qtr net
shr 15 cts vs 15 cts
sales 19.2 mln vs 19.8 mln
avg shrs 4.7 mln vs 5.3 mln
note: 1986 net includes a gain of 108,000 dlrs or two cts a
share from proceeds from the sale of property.
german institutes warn on money supply
four of west germany's five leading
economic research institutes warned that excessive monetary
growth threatened a resurgence of inflation.
but in a dissenting view the diw institute in west berlin,
echoing recent statements by leading bundesbank officials, said
the expansion seen over the last 1-1/2 years did not
the five institutes issued a joint spring report, in which
three -- kiel, hamburg and essen -- forecast a two pct rise in
gnp in 1987, while west berlin and munich predicted one pct.
the four institutes said an expansive policy was welcome in
view of the slowdown in economic activity. but experience has
shown that strong monetary growth eventually leads to a price
rise which undoes the beneficial effects of monetary policy.
given virtual zero inflation in west germany such fears may
"but it has often turned out in the past that the price
climate can quickly deteriorate, forcing the central bank into
the economic costs of a preventive stability policy are
less than fighting inflation once it has taken hold, they said.
the four institutes disputed the view that monetary
expansion would slow of its own accord in 1987 as domestic
investors switch liquidity into longer term capital market
"such redispositions may temporarily dampen the expansion of
central bank money stock, but do not automatically lead to a
smaller expansion of money supply," they said.
a return to growth and stability did not require
spectacular central bank moves, but could be done quietly with
open market operations and repurchase pacts, which would avoid
an interest rate rise by dampening inflationary expectations.
the diw institute said monetary policy should not be
focused simply on growth of production potential. because of
uncertainty about exchange rate developments and economic
weakness other factors should be taken into account.
monetary policy should aim for further interest rate cuts
and avoid rises to boost the economy and discourage revaluation
speculation. recent strong monetary expansion was not a threat
the 1979/81 inflation following strong 1977/78 money growth
reflected other causes, such as rising oil prices and the
ncr corp &lt;ncr> 1st qtr net
shr 65 cts vs 51 cts
net 61.5 mln vs 50.2 mln
revs 1.12 billion vs 960.8 mln
avg shrs 95.3 mln vs 99.4 mln
german producer prices fall 0.1 pct in march
west german producer prices fell 0.1
pct in march compared with february to stand 3.9 pct lower than
in march last year, the federal statistics office said.
in february, producer prices fell 0.3 pct from january and
dropped 4.2 pct from their levels a year earlier.
the statistics office said producer prices for natural gas
had fallen 3.0 pct in march against february, heavy heating oil
prices were 3.2 pct down, liquefied gas prices fell 14 pct and
usda changes low protein wheat terminal prices
lowered its ascs terminal prices for low protein hard red
winter and hard red spring wheat at a number of locations, a
usda reduced the price of hard red winter wheat at kansas
city and texas by six cents, at minneapolis and duluth by 32
cents and at st louis by nine cents, ralph klopfenstein, deputy
administrator of commodity operations at the agricultural
the department also lowered the terminal price of hard red
spring wheat at minneapolis and duluth by 32 cents, he said.
in addition, usda cut the pacific northwest price of hard
red spring wheat by 31 cents, usda officials who asked not to
the officials said hard red spring wheat prices at chicago,
denver and toledo were adjusted by about the same amount as at
the price changes should lead to a pickup of pik and roll
activity, klopfenstein said. the price change was decided upon
last week and will be effective today, he said.
klopfenstein also said the department raised the premiums
on high protein wheat to offset the drop in low protein wheat
prices, meaning the net price on any wheat commanding a protein
fhlbb changes short-term discount note rates
the federal home loan bank board
adjusted the rates on its short-term discount notes as follows:
maturity   new rate  old rate  maturity
30-140 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct   30-179 days
141-160 days  6.13 pct  6.08 pct  180-200 days
161-182 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct  201-274 days
183-200 days  6.17 pct  6.18 pct  275-290 days
201-360 days  5.00 pct  5.00 pct  291-360 days
galileo electro-optics corp &lt;gaeo> 2nd qtr
shr 51 cts vs 40 cts
revs 9.8 mln vs 6.5 mln
shr 74 cts vs 50 cts
net 2.0 mln vs 1.1 mln
revs 17.7 mln vs 11.3 mln
avg shrs 2.7 mln vs 2.1 mln
note:quarter ended march 31. 1987 six months includes
charge of 115,000 dlrs due to reversal of investment tax
boston five &lt;bfcs.o>, neworld &lt;nwor.o> to merge
boston five cents savings bank said it
and neworld bank for savings have agreed to merge, forming a
new holding company, boston five bancorp.
boston five said the proposal calls for its holders to
receive 1.163 shares of the new company's stock for each share
now held and for neworld bank holders to recieve one share for
each share held in a tax free exchange.
boston five said the planned merger with newworld bank for
savings will create the largest savings bank in massachusetts
and the third largest in new england with combined assets of
boston five chairman robert j. spiller said "there is a
natural fit between both banks. we consider this to be a merger
spiller will become chairman of boston five bancorp and
neworld president james m. oates will be president and chief
boston five said its president, peter j. blampied, will
become vice chairman and chief operating officer of the holding
company. the board of the holding company will have an equal
number of directors from each institution.
"unlike many recent combinations, this merger has no
acquisition premium associated with it," blampied said.
boston five has assetsof 1.9 billion dlrs and 35 officers.
neworld has assets of 1.2 billion dlrs and 24 officers in
massachusetts. it also has a loan center in new hampshire.
preparing a recapitalization plan, which includes a common
stock repurchase program and an exchange of debt securities for
the plan, along with a proposal to change its name to
cooper cos inc, will be submitted for shareholders' approval at
the company's annual meeting on june 22.
the meeting had been postponed from its original date of
may 14 in order to let management review recapitalization
in addition, coopervision said operating income in its
current fiscal quarter ending april 30 is expected to show an
improvement over its prior fiscal quarter's 82.5 mln dlrs and
income from continuing operations was not immediately
availalbe for the prior year's second quarter in which it
reported a net loss of 14.9 mln dlrs.
at a drexel burnham lambert investor conference,
coopervision chairman parker montgomery said, as previously
announced, he will listen to any bid that makes sense for
he also said coopervision's stock fell in 1986 due to its
second quarter loss, rumors of a liquidation at 30 dlrs and 35
dlrs a share, and ivan boesky's subsequent sale of his
"the stock dropped six dlrs in three days after boesky sold
his position and has never recovered," montgomery said. the
company's stock is currently trading at 19-1/4.
montgomery further told the conference, "don't be an
investor in the stock on the basis of any short term recovery
in operating or net income in 1987 and 1988."
"our concentration is on maintaining or increasing market
share in our core businesses this year and next, regardless of
the impact to the bottom line," he said.
registrations for june shipment with no limit set for private
exporters, as in april and may, a national coffee growers'
colombia has sold an average of 900,000 bags per month
since the beginning of the calendar year.
canada leading indicator up 0.4 pct in january after 0.4 pct december rise - official
canada leading indicator up 0.4 pct in january after 0.4 pct december rise - official
spanish money supply growing at double target pace
supply, the broad-based liquid assets in public hands (alp),
grew at an annualised rate of 17.6 pct in march against 16.6
pct in february and 19.6 pct in march last year, provisional
the bank's target range for this year is 6.5 to 9.5 pct,
and bank of spain governor mariano rubio said this month he was
aiming for the lower end of that range.
alp grew by 11.4 pct during 1986.
reebok international limited &lt;rbk> 1st qtr
shr 72 cts vs 52 cts
net 38.6 mln vs 25 mln
revs 281.8 mln vs 174.5 mln
avg shrs 53.5 mln vs 48.2 mln
note: 1987 1st quarter amounts do not includes sales of
avia group international inc, acquired at the end of the first
quarter. 1987 1st quarter revenues include rockport revenues of
31 mln dlrs. 1986 1st quarter amounts do not include rockport,
as reebok acuqired that company in october 1986.
blount inc &lt;blt> 4th qtr net
oper shr 16 cts vs three cts
revs 313.9 mln vs 308.9 mln
avg shrs 11.9 mln vs 12.0 mln
oper shr 60 cts vs 27 cts
revs 1.23 billion vs 1.16 billion
avg shrs 11.9 mln vs 12.0 mln
note: prior year net excludes gains 4,896,000 dlrs in
quarter and 8,873,000 dlrs in year from termination of
backlog 1.0 billion dlrs vs 942 mln dlrs.
u.k. money market given late help of 210 mln stg
the bank of england said it gave the
market late assistance of around 210 mln stg, bringing its
total help on the day to some 353 mln stg.
this compares with the bank's estimate of the liquidity
shortage of around 450 mln stg, raised from its early forecast
giant bay &lt;gbylf> in idaho gold venture
ltd said it signed an agreement in principle with hecla mining
co for an operating joint venture on hecla's stibnite, idaho,
giant bay said if its bioleaching technology is used for
ore processing, it will have the right to acquire a working
interest in the property. it said it may spend as much as three
mln u.s. dlrs, excluding capital costs to bring the mine into
production. it said drilling has indicated substantial sulphide
reserves with a gold grade of about 0.1 ounce a ton, and early
tests show the gold ore responds to bioleaching.
blue arrow to acquire richards consultants
blue arrow plc said it signed an
agreement to acquire richards consultants ltd for 29 mln dlrs
richards is a privately-owned new york-based executive
as part of the agreement, blue arrow said the four
principal shareholders who manage richards will enter into
long-term service contracts with it. the agreement is subject
to approval of blue arrow shareholders.
its board declared a three-for-two stock split, payable may one
to holders of record april 17.
asarco ups u.s. lead price 0.50 ct to 27 cts
asarco inc said it is increasing its
base spot sales price for refined lead by one-half cent to 27.0
cents a lb, fob, delivered in carload lots, effective
irving bank corp 1st qtr shr 1.51 dlrs vs 1.62 dlrs
irving bank corp 1st qtr shr 1.51 dlrs vs 1.62 dlrs
irving bank corp &lt;v> 1st qtr net
shr 1.51 dlr vs 1.62 dlr
net 28.6 mln vs 30.4 mln
assets 23.8 billion vs 20.9 billion
deposits 15.5 billion vs 14 billion
loans 13.8 billion vs 12 billion
o'sullivan corp &lt;osl> 1st qtr net
shr 28 cts vs 32 cts
rev 47.9 mln vs 42.9 mln
note: the 1986 earnings per share adjusted for a four for
three stock distribution paid may 1986.
french 13-week t-bill average rate rises to 7.39 pct from 7.36 pct - official
french 13-week t-bill average rate rises to 7.39 pct from 7.36 pct - official
park communications inc &lt;parc> 1st qtr net
shr 15 cts vs 14 cts
revs 32.1 mln vs 29.5 mln
nvhomes &lt;nvh> sets split payment date
nvhomes lp said april 30 will be
the distribution date for new units as a result of its
previously-announced two-for-one split to unitholders of record
dillard department stores agrees to buy two allied stores units for 255 mln dlrs cash
dillard department stores agrees to buy two allied stores units for 255 mln dlrs cash
chemical new york corp 1st qtr shr 1.58 dlrs vs 1.93 dlrs
chemical new york corp 1st qtr shr 1.58 dlrs vs 1.93 dlrs
bankers trust &lt;bt> raises broker loan rate
bankers trust co said it is raising
its broker loan rate to 7-1/2 pct from 7-1/4 pct, effective
u.s. trust co, the only other bank to publicize its broker
rate, was already posting 7-1/2 pct.
pentland to reduce reebok &lt;rbk> holdings
pentland industries plc said it report
a substantial capital gain from the sale of part of its
holdings in reebok international limited, which will cut its
stake in reebok to 32.2 pct from 36.7 pct.
it said reebok filed a registration statement with the
securities and exchange commission for the offering of six mln
shares of reebok common. reebok will sell three mln shares and
pentland will sell 1,404,866 shares, reducing its stake in
reebok to 18.1 mln from 19.5 mln shares.
after the offering, reebok will have 56.1 mln shares shares
pentland said the amount of the capital gain from the sale
depends on the offering price for the reebok shares to be
negotiated between it, reebok, and the other selling
stockholders who will offer about 1.6 mln shares of reebok
pentland said proceeds from the offering will be used by
reebok to retire bank debt incurred in its acquisition of avia
group for about 180 mln dlrs. is said that afterwards, reebok
will have bank credit lines available for general corporate
reebok's stock was selling at 45-1/2, up 1/8. at that
price, the 1.4 mln reebok shares pentland will sell are worth
about 64 mln dlrs and the three mln shares reebok will sell are
pentland said it will use proceeds to fund growth and
pentland said 4,500,000 shares of rebbok will be offered in
the u.s. by a syndicate led by kidder, peabody and co inc and
1,500,000 shares will be offered outside the u.s. by an
it said the u.s. underwriters have been granted an option
to buy from certain selling stockholders up to an additional
900,000 shares to cover overallotments. pentland said it has
not chosen to participate in this over allotment.
pentland said that as soon as the date and price of the
offering have been determined it will release further details.
it said it expects the offering to close in may.
canada january leading indicator up 0.4 pct
rose 0.4 pct in january with eight of the 10 major components
posting gains, the most widespread monthly advance in the past
the index also gained 0.4 pct in the preceeding month. the
unfiltered index, however, fell 0.1 pct in january after rising
the gain was led by the residential construction index
while the manufacturing groups continued to improve and the
stock market index turned up, the federal agency reported.
&lt;national westminster bank plc> 1st qtr net
net 17.7 mln vs 15.3 mln
note: &lt;national westminster bank plc> subsidiary.
loan loss provision 13.8 mln vs 13.0 mln
investment securitiesd gaons 2,003,000 dlrs vs 169,000
irving bank &lt;v> cites loans in earning decline
irving bank corp said the decline in
its first quarter earnings to 28.6 mln dlrs from 30.4 mln dlrs
in the year-ago period were due to the placement on a
non-accrual basis of 215 mln dlrs and 33 mln dlrs of medium and
long-term loans to borrowers in brazil and equador.
excluding the impact of the non-accrual loans, irving said
its first quarter net income would have rose 8.4 pct to 32.9
mln and per share amounts would have risen eight pct to 1.75
dlr. in the first quarter the bank reported earnings per share
of 1.51 dlr compared to 1.62 dlr in the same period last year.
global petroleum corp said today it
lowered the posted cargo prices for number six fuel in the new
york harbor 45 to 75 cts a barrel, effective today.
the decrease brings the prices for one pct sulphur to 20.75
dlrs, down 45 cts, two pct sulphur 20.10 dlrs, down 75 cts, 2.2
pct sulphur 19.75 dlrs, down 75 cts and 2.5 pct sulphur 19.50
prices for 0.3 pct and 0.5 pct sulphur remained unchanged
at 22.50 and 21.85 dlrs, it said.
chemical new york corp &lt;chl> 1st qtr net
shr 1.58 dlrs vs 1.93 dlrs
assets 61.04 billion vs 57.95 billion
loans 38.76 billion vs 39.68 billion
deposits 38.20 billion vs 33.14 billion
return on assets 0.57 pct vs 0.71 pct
return on common equity 11.47 pct vs 15.19 pct
note: 1987 qtr net reduced by 12 mln dlrs because 1.04
billion dlrs of brazil loans were placed on non-accrual
ccc accepts bonus on cattle to canary islands
(ccc) has accepted a bid for an export bonus to cover the sale
of 2,750 head of dairy cattle to the canary islands, the u.s.
the cattle are for delivery may, 1987-october, 1988, it
the bonus was 1,379.00 dlrs per head and was made to
holstein-friesian, inc and will be paid in the form of
an additional 175 headed of dairy cattle for still
available to the canary islands under the export enhancement
program initiative announced july 28, 1986, it said.
afg industries inc &lt;afg> 1st qtr net
shr primary 54 cts vs 41 cts
shr diluted 51 cts vs 38 cts
revs 111.7 mln vs 85.0 mln
avg shrs primary 16,889,254 vs 14,500,737
work on greek alumina plant to start end may
preparatory work for construction of a
450 mln dlr alumina plant near the village of aghia efthymia in
the greek province of fokida will begin at the end of next
month and the plant will be operational by 1992, industry
greece yesterday signed contracts with the soviet union for
the joint venture project, the biggest investment in the
petsos said the soviet union, which had initially agreed to
buy 380,000 tonnes, would now purchase the plant's entire
output of 600,000 tonnes a year.
&lt;new milford savings bank> 1st qtr net
shr 62 cts vs 26 cts
note: 1987 includes five ct shr charge from loan loss
commonwealth aluminum puts plant on the block
(comalco) said it put its goldendale, wash., smelter back on
the market after would-be buyer, columbia aluminum corp, of
hermiston, ore., failed to pull together financing by an april
the plant, which has an asking price of 18.7 mln dlrs plus
several mln more dlrs for inventory, it said. commonwealth said
it is continuing talks with columbia, but has also opened talks
commonwealth bought the plant in january 1985 and closed it
feb 15, 1987, leaving about 400 workers jobless.
h.f. ahmanson and co &lt;ahm> 1st qtr net
shr 84 cts vs 80 cts
revs 703.9 mln vs 759.7 mln
loans 19.06 billion vs 19.51 billion
deposits 21.60 billion vs 19.86 billion
assets 27.16 billion vs 27.15 billion
note: prior qtr per shr figure adjusted for three-for-one
pakistan reportedly bought white sugar at tender
pakistan is reported to have bought
100,000 tonnes of white sugar at its weekend tender from a
the purchase, believed priced around 210 dlrs a tonne cost
and freight for fine/medium grain, was due to be shipped for
arrival in may (30,000 tonnes), in june (45,000) and in july
fed expected to set three-day repurchase pacts
the federal reserve is expected to
enter the u.s. government securities market to add temporary
reserves directly by arranging three-day system repurchase
they said the fed may add the reserves indirectly instead
via a large round, two billion dlrs or more, of customer
federal funds, which averaged a high 6.35 pct on friday,
opened at 6-7/16 pct and traded between there and 6-1/2 pct.
allied stores &lt;als> sells dillard &lt;dds> two units
in little rock, ark., and allied stores corp jointly said they
entered a definitive purchase agreement for the sale to dillard
of the joske's and the cain-sloan divisions of allied for 255
mln dlrs cash, subject to certain closing adjustments.
the sale excludes certain real estate assets of joske's and
cain-sloan, which allied estimates have an aggregate value of
30 mln dlrs based on current market conditions.
joske's has 26 stores in texas and one in arizona.
cain-sloan has four stores in nashville. joske's is the largest
unit allied has slated for sale in its restructuring.
allied stores corp, a subsidiary of campeau corp, was
acquired by acquired by the canadian developer last year.
robert campeau, chairman of allied, said "this is a
terrific start to our disposition program which is proceeding
well ahead of schedule. this sale will fulfill the requirements
under our bank agreements to sell certain assets by june 30 and
give us additional flexibility in the disposal of the remaining
allied stores is required to pay 200 mln dlrs in bank debt
by june 30. there had been some doubts on wall street that the
a campeau source said, "we believe this cash sale puts us
in a very strong negotiating position to maximize the proceeds
allied can receive from its other divisions."
"allied was able to put itself in a position where it knows
it will be able to meet the june 30 payment schedules," the
about 1.1 bilion dlrs in allied assets had been targeted
for sale by dec. 31, 1988 to pay for the aquisition of allied
allied will be taking bids for its other divisions.
targeted for sale are bonwit tellers, garfinckel's, dey's,
donaldson's, herpolsheimer's, heer's, miller's, miller and
rhoads, pomeroy's, catherine's, plymouth shops, and jerry
leonard. the divisions provided 38.4 pct of allied net sales
and 11.8 pct of store profit in fiscal 1985.
ncr &lt;ncr> continues to expect earnings growth
first quarter profit, said it continues to expect that it will
report record earnings and revenue for all of 1987.
"our optimism is based on our incoming order rates and the
strength of our product lines," the company said.
ncr corp plans additional new product announcements this
ncr earlier said first quarter profit increased to 61.5 mln
dlrs or 65 cts share from 50.2 mln dlrs or 51 cts share in the
prior year. ncr's 1986 full-year earnings rose to 336.5 mln
dlrs from 315.2 mln dlrs in the prior year.
ncr said the increase in first quarter profit resulted from
strong revenue growth, which was particularly strong in europe
growth in u.s. revenues also improved, the company said.
first quarter revenues increased to 1.12 billion dlrs from
960.8 mln dlrs in the prior year.
ncr's u.s. dollar value of 1987 first quarter worldwide
incoming orders posted a very substantial gain over the prior
year first quarter, ncr also said without giving specific
figures. order growth was broad based across ncr's product
lines, with the greatest growth coming from u.s., it said.
genetics institute inc &lt;geni.o> 1st qtr loss
shr loss 11 cts vs loss 11 cts
net loss 1,309,000 vs loss 937,000
entre computer &lt;etre.o> closing overseas units
entre computer centers inc said it
is discontinuing its european and australian operations.
the company today reported a loss for the second quarter
ended february 28 of 2,733,000 dlrs, after a 6,705,000 dlr
pretax provision for the shutdown of the overseas units and a
2,511,000 dlr tax credit.  a year earlier it earned 911,000
it said the overseas operations lost 400,000 dlrs in the
second quarter and did not appear strong enough to provide for
entre computer centers inc &lt;etre> 2nd qtr loss
shr loss 29 cts vs profit 10 cts
net loss 2,733,000 vs profit 911,000
revs 21.5 mln vs 18.5 mln
shr loss 23 cts vs profit 26 cts
net loss 2,154,000 vs profit 2,445,000
revs 37.8 mln vs 37.7 mln
note: current year net both periods includes 6,705,000 dlr
pretax provision for closing overseas operations and tax
credits 2,511,000 dlrs in quarter and 1,977,000 dlrs in half.
merrill lynch &lt;mer> investment revenues up
merrill lynch and co said investment
banking revenues were strong in the first quarter, rising to
257.4 mln dlrs from 152.9 mln in the first quarter 1986.
"we have made steady progress in a period of market
activity which has been marked by unprecedented activity,"
william schreyer, chairman and cheif executive officer, and
daniel tully, president and chief operating officer, said.
earlier, the company reported first quarter net income of
108.6 mln dlrs, or one dlr per share, up from 86.8 mln dlrs, or
85 cts per share, in 1986's first quarter.
merrill lynch said its insurance revenues made the biggest
gains in the first quarter, rising to 242.3 mln dlrs in the
this first quarter, from 68.3 mln dlrs in last year's first
standard microsystems corp &lt;smsc.o> 4th qtr net
shr profit four cts vs loss nil
net profit 448,000 vs loss 28,000
revs 15.1 mln vs 11.5 mln
avg shrs 11.2 mln vs 11.1 mln
shr profit four cts vs profit nil
net profit 459,000 vs profit 51,000
revs 53.2 mln vs 44.5 mln
avg shrs 11.2 mln vs 11.1 mln
note: net includes tax credits of 53,000 dlrs vs 1,023,000
dlrs in quarter and 48,000 dlrs vs 2,557,000 dlrs in year.
pennsylvania real estate investment trust &lt;pei>
oper shr 39 cts vs 47 cts
oper shr 82 cts vs 93 cts
note: current year net excludes gains on sale of real
estate of 470,778 dlrs in quarter and 1,533,273 dlrs in half.
allwaste inc &lt;alws.o> 2nd qtr feb 28
shr profit four cts vs loss one cts
net profit 172,000 vs loss 180,000
shr profit nine cts vs loss four cts
net profit 315,000 vs loss 107,000
revs 7.4 mln vs 1.8 mln
avg shrs 4.4 mln vs 2.6 mln
scott and stringfellow &lt;scot.o> 3rd qtr mar 31
shr 37 cts vs 37 cts
revs 7.9 mln vs 6.8 mln
shr 1.12 dlrs vs 1.07 dlrs
net 1.8 mln vs 1.3 mln
revs 23.2 mln vs 19.7 mln
avg shrs 1.6 mln vs 1.2 mln
note:full name is scott and stringfellow financial corp.
foster &lt;fwc> unit audit reveals discrepancies
foster wheeler corp &lt;fwc> said an
audit of its stearns airport equiment co inc unit, revealed
"substantial discrepancies" in stearns accounts that may
require material adjustments to previously announce
consolidated results of the company and its subsidiaries.
foster said certain stearn officers and senior management
made stearn's operations appear more profitable than they were
by improperly recording job costs. it said stearn's president
and controller had resigned. a foster spokesman said he did not
know the names of the president and controller, and could not
foster said the amount involved in the "discrepancy" is
about 13.7 mln dlrs before taxes or about 8.2 mln dlrs net
after tax due to an "improper recording of job costs over a
period of several years and continuing through part of the
stearns is a unit of foster's conergic corp subsidiary.
the company said the impact on its results for 1987 was not
"likely to be significant" but the amount to be charged to
prior periods had not been determined.
foster reported after tax earnings of 28 mln dlrs, 26 mln
dlrs and 35.4 mln dlrs for 1986, 1985, and 1984, respectively.
stearns, based in crowley, texas, makes airport baggage
conveyor equipment and passenger loading bridges.
foster, a diversified international concern with 27
subsidiaries operating worldwide, is based in livingston, new
jersey. its reported revenues for the period ended december 26,
the company said a detailed audit and investigation is
continuing. a company spokesman declined to comment further on
taiwan announces new round of import tariff cuts
taiwan announced plans for another round
of import tariff cuts on 862 foreign goods shortly before trade
talks with washington which officials described as a move to
help balance trade with the united states.
wang der-hwa, deputy director of the finance ministry's
customs administration department, told reporters the list of
products included 60 items asked by washington.
"the move is part of our government efforts to encourage
imports from our trading partners, particularly from the united
he said the ministry sent a proposal today to the cabinet
that the tariffs on such products as cosmetics, bicycles,
apples, radios, garments, soybeans and television sets be cut
by between five and 50 pct.
the cabinet was expected to give its approval next thursday
and the new tariff cuts would be implemented possibly starting
taiwan introduced a sweeping tariff cut on some 1,700
foreign products last january aimed at helping reduce its
growing trade surplus with the united states, the island's
washington however was not satisfied with the cuts and
pressed for more reductions as a way of cutting its huge trade
washington's deficit with taipei rose to a record 13.6
billion u.s. dlrs last year from 10.2 billion in 1985. it
widened to 3.61 billion in the first quarter of 1987 from 2.78
billion a year earlier, taiwan's official figures show.
today's announcement came before a departure later today of
a 15-member taiwan delegation for washington for a series of
the delegation's leader, vincent siew, told reporters last
night he was leaving with "a heavy heart," meaning that he would
face tough talks in washington because of rising protectionist
sentiments in the u.s. congress. taiwan's 1986 trade surplus
with washington was the third largest, after japan and canada.
siew said the talks, starting on april 14, would cover u.s.
calls for taiwan to open its market to american products,
purchases of major u.s. machinery and power plant equipment,
import tariff cuts and protection of intellectual property.
"i am afraid this time we have to give more than take from
our talks with the u.s.," he said without elaborating.
bulgaria, romania grain crop seen less favorable
grain crop in bulgaria and romania appear less favorable than
in 1986, the u.s. agriculture department's officer in belgrade
the report said the assessment was based on travel in the
two countries from march 30 to april 4.
it said crop conditions were better than earlier expected
following the extreme dry conditions last fall and the
however, in general plant development was at least three
weeks or more behind normal this spring, and conditions varied
greatly by regions, the report said.
fields seeded during the optimum period last fall, and
especially those receiving supplemental irrigation water (about
65 pct of the fields observed), appeared to be in good
condition, with little evidence of winterkill, while others
fields lacking adequate moisture last fall showed weak and
uneven stands. spotty germination and winterkill in those
fields averaged 10 to 30 pct, it said.
elcor corp &lt;elk> 3rd qtr march 31
shr 21 cts vs eight cts
revs 26.6 mln vs 17.7 mln
shr 1.11 dlrs vs 43 cts
net 7.8 mln vs 3.0 mln
revs 86.9 mln vs 82.9 mln
note:shares adjusted for 2-for-1 stock split payable may
28, 1987 to holders of record may 14, 1987.
1987 3rd qtr and nine months includes tax loss carryforward
gain of 695,000 dlrs and 3.6 mln dlrs, respectively.
1986 3rd qtr nine months includes tax loss carryforward
gains of 260,000 dlrs and 1.4 mln dlrs, respectively.
saudi arabia buys rbd palm olein
saudi arabia bought 4,000 tonnes of
malaysian refined bleached deodorised palm olein for june 1/10
shipment at around 356 dlrs per tonne cost and freight jeddah,
abington savings bank &lt;abbk.o> 1st qtr net
shr 27 cts vs not given
loans 92.8 mln vs 84.7 mln
deposits 121.9 mln vs 119.4 mln
assets 155.4 mln vs 152.4 mln
note: prior share not given due to june 18, 1986 conversion
banking center &lt;tbcx> 1st qtr net
shr 29 cts vs not given
note: company went public in august 1986.
net includes loan loss provision 550,000 dlrs vs 203,000
dlrs, gain on sale of securities of 309,000 dlrs vs 638,000
dlrs and gain on sale of loans 403,000 dlrs vs 553,000 dlrs.
soviet tankers set to carry kuwaiti oil
kuwait has agreed to charter tankers
from the soviet union in a move to protect its oil exports
through the mideast gulf, diplomatic sources said.
they said the agreement followed months of talks with the
soviet union and the u.s. on ways to secure its oil exports
after iran started to attack kuwaiti-connected vessels in
retaliation for kuwait's backing for iran's war enemy iraq.
diplomats said they expect three soviet tankers initially
to reinforce other flags already supporting kuwait's 22-tanker
the diplomats said they knew of no deal for moscow to
provide a naval escort for its own vessels, but "the idea of
they said soviet cargo ships bound for kuwait in the past
to unload arms and materiel for road delivery to iraq were
known to have sailed under escort. so far, none of the soviet
ships are known to have been attacked by iran. diplomats said
they expected the chartered soviet tankers to sail between
kuwait and khor fakkan on the united arab emirates (uae) coast
a short way outside the strait of hormuz at the mouth of the
chemical &lt;chl> net hurt by brazil, expenses
chemical new york corp said its
first-quarter profits fell by 16 pct, largely because it placed
1.04 billion dlrs of loans to brazil on non-accrual.
chemical reported first-quarter net income of 86.2 mln
dlrs, down from 102.6 mln a year earlier, but declaring the
brazilian loans non-performing cost chemical 21 mln dlrs in
lost interest income, or 12 mln dlrs after-tax.
a 13.3 pct jump in non-interest expense to 471.3 mln dlrs
from 415.9 mln also hit the bottom line. it said the rise was
mainly due to staff costs associated with continued growth in
consumer, capital markets and investment banking activities.
excluding the effect of placing brazil on non-accrual,
chemical said its net income would have been 98.2 mln dlrs, or
brazil suspended interest payments on 68 billion dlrs of
medium- and long-term debt on february 20. if they are not
resumed by year's end, chemical said its after-tax net for the
whole of 1987 will be reduced by about 51 mln dlrs.
chemical also placed 52 mln dlrs of loans to ecuador on
non-accrual because the quito government also suspended
interest payments on its foreign debt. this reduced interest
chemical said net interest income fell to 476.4 mln dlrs
from 488.9 mln and its net spread narrowed to 3.61 pct from
this reflected the reclassification of brazilian loans, a
reduced federal income tax rate (which affected the calculation
of the taxabale-equivalent adjustment on tax-exempt assets) and
a narrowing of the spread between the prime rate and chemical's
foreign exchange trading profits rose to 37.9 mln dlrs from
27.0 mln, but bond trading profits dropped to 21.9 mln dlrs
fees from trust and other banking services rose to 146.5
mln dlrs from 129.3 mln a year earlier, chemical said.
the provision for loan losses was 87.2 mln dlrs, compared
with 83.8 mln. net loan charge-offs were 86.5 mln, up from 60.7
mln, leaving the allowance for loan losses at 672.6 mln dlrs at
quarter's end, or 1.74 pct of loans outstanding, compared with
594.3 mln, or 1.50 pct, a year earlier.
non-accruing loans at the end of march were 2.39 billion
dlrs (1.35 billion excluding brazil), compared with 1.35
billion at the end of 1986 and 1.22 billion at the end of
genetics &lt;geni.o> sees higher 87 losses
earlier reporting an increased first quarter net loss, said it
expects to incur losses in fiscal 1987 "that are somewhat higher
than those reported in fiscal 1986."
it had a loss of 4,504,000 dlrs for fiscal 1986 ended
november 30, compared to a fiscal 1985 loss of 1,732,00 dlrs.
the company said the losses result from its strategic
decision to invest prudent levels of equity in development of
products the company can manufacture and bring to market.
genetics earlier said first quarter ended february 28
losses rose to 1,309,000 dlrs from year-ago loss of 937,000
investor albert kahn said in a statement
that a group he heads increased its stake in trans-lux corp to
8.9 pct from 8.1 pct on a fully diluted basis.
kahn said he indicated in a filing with the securities and
exchange commission that his group bought an additional 7,300
trans-lux common shares and 100,000 dlrs of nine pct
convertible subordinated debentures due 2005, convertible into
kahn said he is considering seeking representation on the
trans-lux board and starting a proxy contest in connection with
kahn also said he is seeking an examination of the
trans-lux shareholder list and corporate books and records
trans-lux is a connecticut concern that leases teleprinters
and display units in brokerage offices, airports and other
kahn is a miami insurance executive and investor.
solitron devices inc &lt;sod> 4th qtr net
shr 40 cts vs 15 cts
revs 13.2 mln vs 13.3 mln
shr 67 cts vs 67 cts
revs 49.5 mln vs 50.2 mln
note: 1986 year after 819,000 dlr tax provision and 660,000
1985 year after 559,000 dlr credit for anticipated income
tax settlement for 1970 and 331,000 dlr tax provision
u.s. trust corp first qtr shr 88 cts vs 83 cts
u.s. trust corp first qtr shr 88 cts vs 83 cts
peoples heritage bank &lt;phbk> 1st qtr net
shr 51 cts vs not given
note: net includes securities gains of 663,000 dlrs vs
company went public in december 1986.
stuart hall co inc &lt;stuh.o> 1st qtr feb 28 net
shr 11 cts vs 12 cts
revs 12.1 mln vs 10.2 mln
clayton homes inc &lt;cmh> 3rd qtr march 31 net
shr 21 cts vs 18 cts
revs 38.2 mln vs 35.3 mln
shr 62 cts vs 56 cts
revs 125.9 mln vs 112.3 mln
backlog nine mln vs six mln
note: share adjusted for five-for-four stock split in june
swift to sell south dakota pork plant
swift independent packing co said it
agreed in principle to sell its huron, south dakota, pork plant
to huron dressed beef, for undisclosed terms.
completion of the proposed transaction is subject to
huron's ability to hire an experienced work force at
competitive rates, and receive government approval of the
purchase and operation of the plant, swift said.
u.s. trust corp &lt;ustc.o> 1st qtr net
shr primary 88 cts vs 83 cts
shr diluted 84 cts vs 78 cts
avg assets 2.62 billion vs 2.42 billion
deposits 2.06 billion vs 1.80 billion
fed adds reserves via customer repurchases
the federal reserve entered the u.s.
government securities market to arrange 1.5 billion dlrs of
customer repurchase agreements, a fed spokesman said.
dealers said federal funds were trading at 6-1/2 pct when
the fed began its temporary and indirect supply of reserves to
most had expected the fed to supply reserves directly via
system repurchase agreements or to add them indirectly through
two billion dlrs or more of customer repurchase agreements.
some believe the fed is adding fewer reserves than are needed
to keep upward pressure on rates and so help the dollar.
desptp omc &lt;dso> 1st qtr net
shr 54 cts vs 51 cts
sales 90.3 mln vs 96.8 mln
park communications inc &lt;parc.o> 1st qtr mar 31
shr 15 cts vs 14 cts
revs 32.1 mln vs 29.5 mln
federal guarantee corp &lt;fdgc.o> 1st qtr net
shr 34 cts vs 32 cts
revs 13.7 mln vs 12.7 mln
angell care master lp &lt;acr> raises quarterly
shr 38 cts vs 36 cts prior
franklin michigan insured sets lower payout
mthly div 6.6 cts vs 6.9 cts prior
note: franklin michigan insured tax-free income fund.
franklin high yield sets higher payout
mthly div eight cts vs 7.1 cts prior
note: franklin high yield tax-free income fund.
franklin pennsylvania tax-free in initial payout
tax-free income fund said its board declared an initial monthly
dividend of six cts per share, payable april 30 to holders of
general partners sells gencorp &lt;gy> stake
partnership that recently ended its bid to take over gencorp
inc, told the securities and exchange commission it sold nearly
all of its remaining 8.6 pct stake in the company.
general partners said it sold 1,930,500 shares of gencorp
on april 10 at 118.25 dlrs a share in an open market
transaction on the new york stock exchange.
it said the sale leaves it with 108 gencorp common shares.
the partnership, which includes wagner and brown of midland
texas and irvine, calif.-based afg industries inc, last week
dropped its 100 dlr a share hostile tender offer.
franklin pennsylvania u.s. sets initial payout
investors u.s. government securities fund fund said its board
declared an initial monthly dividend of 7.8 cts per share,
payable april 30 to holders of record april 15.
gaf &lt;gaf> studying borg-warner &lt;bor> plan
gaf corp is studying an agreement
under which merrill lynch capital partners will take
borg-warner corp private in a 4.23 billion dlr transaction, a
the spokesman had no further comment.
analysts said there was speculation gaf would make a new
offer for the chicago-based plastics and automobile parts
company. borg-warner's stock rose 7/8 to 49-1/4, above the
merrill lynch 48.50 dlrs per share tender offer price.
merrill lynch capital partners, a unit of merrill lynch and
co, is tendering for 89 pct of borg-warner and offering a
package of cash and securities for the balance of the shares.
gaf had offered 46 dlrs per share previously. it holds 19.9
national westminster bank usa 1st-qtr net rises
higher loans and core deposit volumes as well as a substantial
increase in net interest income contributed to a 16 pct rise in
first-quarter earnings to 17.7 mln dlrs from 15.3 mln reported
the earnings gain came despite a 1.5 mln dlr reduction of
income as a result of placing brazilian loans on non-accrual.
net interest income totalled 92.5 mln dlrs compared with
91.7 mln dlrs in the same 1986 period as loans, mostly to
middle market businesses, increased by 896 mln dlrs. but some
of these gains were offset by low levels of interest rates.
provision for loan losses rose to 13.8 mln dlrs from 13.0
mln a year earlier. at march 31, the allowance for loan losses
was 114.2 mln dlrs versus 94.8 mln at end of march 1986.
non-accrual loans rose to 286 mln dlrs from 132 mln at the
end of the first quarter of 1986, largely because 119 mln dlrs
of loans to brazil were put on non-accrual status.
the bank said that if these loans remain on non-accrual for
the remainder of the year net income for 1987 would be reduced
national westminster bank usa is a wholly-owned subsidiary
laser photonics inc &lt;lazr.o> 4th qtr dec 31
shr loss 26 cts vs loss one cts
net loss 699,000 vs loss 20,617
shr loss 62 cts vs loss eight cts
net loss 1.7 mln vs loss 185,003
revs 3.6 mln vs 4.5 mln
eastern utilities associates &lt;eua> ups payout
qtly div 57-1/2 cts vs 54-1/2 cts prior qtr
italy's buitoni acquires vismara food group
company industrie buitoni perugina spa said it has acquired the
buitoni said in a statement that vismara had 1986 sales of
181 billion lire and net profit of 11 billion lire, employs 950
buitoni did not disclose financial details about the
acquisition. de benedetti said last week that his group was
negotiating a purchase of an unidentified italian food firm.
vismara primarily produces a variety of pork products. "the
acquisition represents a diversification in a market sector
with annual consumption of 8,500 billion lire," buitoni said.
buitoni also said its consolidated revenue during the first
quarter of this year was 429 billion lire, up 51 pct from the
as reported, buitoni's consolidated revenue rose last year
to 1,623 billion lire from 1,177 billion in 1985. net profit
rose to 18.5 billion lire from 448 mln lire in 1985.
mcgraw-hill &lt;mhp> divests south african unit
mcgraw-hill inc said it has sold its
mcgraw-hill book co south africa pty ltd subsidiary to a local
management group for an undisclosed amount of cash and halted
the sale of all products and services to south africa.
the company said the divestiture follows a resolution of
its board in february that cited increased political and social
unrest within south africa and the refusal of the south african
government to abolish the apartheid system.
oak ondustries &lt;oak> to buy electronics firm
agreed to buy the stock of electronic technologies inc of new
york for an undisclosed amount of cash.
it said the acquisition is part of its ongoing stategy to
restructure its core businesses through cost reduction programs
and the purchase of compatible companies.
peoples heritage bank &lt;phbk> 1st qtr net
shr 51 cts vs not given
note: includes net securities gains of 663,000 dlrs vs 1.2
company converted to stock ownership in december 1986.
revlon group agrees to merge with macandrews and forbes group for 20.10 dlrs/shr cash
revlon group agrees to merge with macandrews and forbes group for 20.10 dlrs/shr cash
u.s. trust co &lt;ustc> raises broker loan rate
u.s. trust co said it raised its
broker loan rate to 7-3/4 pct from 7-1/2 pct, effective
bankers trust co &lt;bt>, which also quotes its broker loan
rate publicly, raised its rate to 7-1/2 pct earlier today.
crazy eddie inc said its board has
adopted a defensive shareholder rights plan and said it has
reacived inquiries on a friendly merger.
it said under the plan, shareholders of record as of april
21 will receive a right to purchase under certain circumstances
at a price of 42 dlrs 0.01 preferred share for each common
share held.  the rights expire april 9, 1997.
the company said the rights would be exercisable 20
business days after a party were to acquire 20 pct or more of
crazy eddie common stock or announce a bid for 30 pct or more.
adds dropped year of rights expiration.
biotech electronics inc &lt;ion.to> 3rd qtr net
shr eight cts vs one-half ct
revs 7.2 mln vs 7.4 mln
shr 28 cts vs 11 cts
revs 26.2 mln vs 22.6 mln
portuguese consumer prices up 1.4 pct in march
portugal's consumer prices rose 1.4 pct
in march after a one pct increase in february and a 1.2 pct
rise in march 1986, the national statistics institute said.
the consumer price index (base 100 for 1976) rose to 772.0
from 761.3 in february and compared with 703.4 in march 1986.
this gave a year-on-year march inflation rate of 9.8 pct
against 9.5 pct in february and 12.2 pct in march 1986.
measured as an annual average rate, inflation in march was
10.9 pct compared with 11.1 pct in february. the government
forecasts annual inflation of about eight pct this year.
myers industries inc &lt;mye> 1st qtr net
shr 22 cts vs 18 cts
sales 21.0 ln vs 18.8 mln
note: per share figures adjusted for ten pct stock dividend
gte corp 1st qtr shr 78 cts vs 86 cts
gte corp 1st qtr shr 78 cts vs 86 cts
resdel &lt;rsdl.o> to merge with san/bar &lt;sbar.o>
and san/bar corp has agreed to merge san/bar into resdel.
the arrangement calls for san/bar to spin-off assets of its
break-free division to shareholders then exchange its own
shares for resdel stock at a ratio of one resdel share for each
midlantic &lt;midl.o> to acquire county bancorp
midlantic corp said it agreed to
acquire county bancorp for about 23 mln dlrs in an agreement
calling for county trust co, a county bancorp subsidiary, to
midlantic said it will pay 83.73 dlrs a share in cash, or
2.36 times county bancorp's march 31 book value, for each of
county's about 276,0000 shares outstanding. it said it received
an option from three principal shareholders for 40 pct of
the acquisition is expected in the third quarter of 1987
and is subject to regulatory and shareholder approvals.
people's savings bank of brockton &lt;pbkb.o>
assets 173.0 mln vs 152.9 mln
note:quarter ended march 31. the company completed
conversion from mutual to stock form in october 1986, raising
14.1 mln dlrs in net proceeds through the sale of 2.3 mln
micro general corp &lt;mgen.o> 4th qtr loss
shr nil vs loss six cts
net loss 6,319 vs loss 265,651
shr nil vs loss 10 cts
net profit 4,323 vs loss 432,458
gte corp &lt;gte> 1st qtr mar 31
shr 78 cts vs 86 cts
net 265.0 mln vs 283.0 mln
revs 3.7 billion vs 3.6 billion
avg shrs 329.0 mln vs 319.0 mln
gte posts pre-tax loss of 121 mln dlrs in 1st qtr for 50 pct share of us sprint
gte posts pre-tax loss of 121 mln dlrs in 1st qtr for 50 pct share of us sprint
group raises scandinavia fund &lt;scf> stake
foreign investment firms and investors said it raised its stake
in scandinavia fund inc to 2,607,900 shares, or 40.0 pct of the
total outstanding from 2,309,700 shares, or 35.4 pct.
in a filing with the securities and exchange commission,
the group also said it is considering an informal offer made by
scandinavia fund president bjorn carlson on march 31 which
would grant it representation on the company's board.
the group includes vbi corp, a turks and caicos islands
investment firm, and ingemar rydin industritillbehor ab, a
swedish investment firm, and erik martin vik, a norwegian
the group said vbi and the elder vik bought a combined
298,200 scandinavia fund common shares since march 13 at prices
ranging from 9.500 to 10.000 dlrs a share.
square d corp &lt;sqd> 1st qtr net
shr 79 cts vs 73 cts
sales 336.1 mln vs 334.1 mln
triton &lt;oil> says paris basin reserves up 39 pct
triton energy corp said proven reserves
of the villespedue oil field in france's paris basin were
estimated at a total of 67.5 mln barrels on march one, up 39
pct from 48.7 mln barrels on may 31, 1986.
triton said its 60 pct owned &lt;triton europe plc> subsidiary
has a 50 pct interest in the field which is located 50 miles
east of paris. the other 50 pct is held by &lt;total exploration
has started the year aggressively, but industry analysts said
the company still faces some tough rounds in its fight to stop
"i am more impressed with what's happening at ibm than i
have been in a long time," said painewebber analyst stephen
"but they're not out of the woods yet," he added.
at 1.30 dlrs a share, ibm's first-quarter net income easily
topped most estimates on wall street, which had ranged from an
most analysts said they were pleasantly surprised by ibm's
performance. but they indicated that ibm's chances for a full
recovery hinged on several key factors whose impact will not be
felt until later in the year.
these include the success of ibm's new personal computer
line, introduced two weeks ago, and its 9370 minicomputers,
which will begin volume shipments in july.
in addition, ibm has said the full benefits of its
early-retirement program and other cost-cutting moves will
analysts noted that ibm chairman john f. akers was
relatively more upbeat in assessing the company's outlook than
he has been for nearly a year.
"although the worldwide economic situation remains
unsettled, there are some encouraging signs in our business,"
akers said, pointing to, among other things, higher
first-quarter shipments. "we remain optimistic about the
prospects for both the industry and ibm," he said.
"akers was most encouraging," said painewebber's smith.
a weak dollar, a lower tax rate and strong mainframe
computer sales all contributed to the better-than-expected
"shipments of the 3090 mainframes were very strong in
march," after a weak january and february, said ulric weil of
sales of the top-of-the-line mainframes, commonly called
the sierras, "bailed out the whole quarter," weil said, adding,
"if this continues, it augers well for the rest of the year."
micro mask inc &lt;nms.o> 2nd qtr mar 31 oper loss
oper shr loss 20 cts vs loss 63 cts
oper net loss 439,000 vs loss 1,347,000
oper shr loss 43 cts vs loss 1.02 dlrs
oper net loss 934,000 vs loss 2,333,000
note: oper data does not include 1986 losses from
discontinued operations of 60,000 dlrs, or three cts per shr,
in qtr and 151,000 dlrs, or seven cts per shr, in six mths.
4,000 tonnes of canadian rapeseed in export business overnight
for last half may/first half june shipment, trade sources said.
irving bank &lt;v> 1st-qtr net hurt by brazil
irving bank corp said a six pct drop
in first-quarter net income from a year earlier was largely the
result of placing medium- and long-term loans to borrowers in
brazil and ecuador on non-accrual status.
income in the first three months fell to 28.60 mln dlrs
from 30.43 mln in the same 1986 period. earnings per share
dropped to 1.51 dlrs from 1.62.
irving put 215 mln dlrs of brazilian and 33 mln dlrs of
ecuadorean loans on non-accrual, reducing first-quarter net
income by a total of 4.4 mln dlrs after tax.
irving estimates full year net would be reduced by 15.3 mln
dlrs after tax if no cash interest payments are received on
these loans during the remainder of 1987.
also adversely affecting earnings were losses on the
trading of securities and higher non-interest expenses,
although these were partly offset by increased trust income,
profits from foreign exchange trading and investment securities
the allowance for loan losses was 224.8 mln dlrs, up from
185.2 mln a year earlier. the provision for loan losses was
21.8 mln versus 19.5 mln in the first quarter of 1986.
qtly div 7-1/2 cts vs six cts prior
note: full name allegheny and western energy corp.
standard oil co said a contract has
been awarded to &lt;cbs engineering inc> for a drilling and
production platform to be installed in ewing bank block 826 in
the gulf of mexico where standard and mobil corp each own a 40
standard said its standard oil production co subsidiary
will operate the platform which is being designed to produce
15,000 barrels of oil and 50 mln cubic feet of gas daily. the
platform is now expected to be installed in the summer of 1988.
other owners are kerr-mcgee corp &lt;kmg> with 16.66 pct and
&lt;prudential insurance co of america> with  3.34 pct.
united telecommunications inc 1st qtr shr 13 cts vs 47 cts
united telecommunications inc 1st qtr shr 13 cts vs 47 cts
&lt;coast r.v. inc> 1st qtr net
shr profit one ct vs loss 28 cts
net profit 23,000 vs loss 725,000
sales 20.6 mln vs 18.5 mln
u.s. february trade to be reported on new basis
trade figures to be reported tuesday by the commerce department
will be on a new basis reflecting more recent data, so avoiding
future revisions of the monthly figure, commerce officials
the overall january deficit of 14.8 billion dlrs will be
revised, but the february figure will be a final one, officials
previously, the initial monthly figure has had to be
revised in subsequent months because of the time lag between
the report and the compiling of final estimates on imports and
the reporting of the february trade data was delayed
several weeks to permit gathering latest figures on imports and
exports to give a clearer picture of the monthly trade balance.
revlon &lt;rev> and macandrews and forbes to merge
revlon group inc &lt;rev> said that they have entered into a
definitive mergewr agreement where macandrews will acquire
revlon at 20.10 dlrs per common share in cash.
macandrews said it increased its offer to purchase all
revlon common shares to 20.10 dlrs a share, from its april 1
offer of 18.50 dlrs a share.
following consummation of the offer, a unit of macandrews
will merge into revlon and each remaining share will be
converted into the right to receive 20.10 dlrs per share in
revlon said its board of directors unanimously approved the
macandrews and revlon also said they have reached a
settlement with the plaintiff in the pending litigation
challenging acquisition of the shares by macanrews.
the companies said the tender offer and withdrawal rights
will expireon tuesday april 28, unless extended.
macandrews said it will promptly file revised tender offer
material with the securities and exchange commission. drexel
burnham lambert inc is acting as dealer-manager for the offer,
revlon currently has about 42 mln shares outstanding. the
current offer price is about 782 mln dlrs, a company spokesman
said, up from the previous offer of 720 mln dlrs.
on april 1, macandrews and forbes, owned by ronald
perelman, offered 18.50 dlrs a share for the 63 pct of revlon
shares he did not already own.
since the offer was made over a dozen shareholder lawsuits
were brought against revlon alleging the original offer was too
but, the companies said these lawsuits have been settled in
real estate firm cuts intermagnetics&lt;inma> stake
grove, fla., real estate development company, said it cut its
stake in intermagnetics general corp to 308,400 shares, or 4.8
pct of the total outstanding, from 358,400 shares, or 5.6 pct.
in a filing with the securities and exchange commission,
roland said it sold 50,000 shares on feb 4 at 5.13 dlrs each.
as long as roland's stake in intermagnetics general is
below five pct, it is not required to report any further
first commerce corp &lt;fcom> 1st qtr net
shr 40 cts vs 31 cts
dataproducts &lt;dpc> to buy imaging solutions
it signed a letter of intent to acquire the imaging solutions
inc unit of reliance electric co under undisclosed terms.
this acquisition will give it all rights to proprietary
solid and liquid ink technologies which had been developed by a
joint venture operated by it and exxon corp &lt;xon>, dataproducts
it said imaging solutions, formerly named exxon printing
systems inc, had been a reliance electric co subsidiary.
but reliance recently became an independent company as the
result of a leveraged buyout from its former owner, exxon.
jannock &lt;jn.to> acquires half-stake in printer
jannock ltd said its jannock imaging co
ltd unit acquired a 50 pct stake in arthurs-jones lithographing
ltd, of toronto, for undisclosed terms.
it said the acquisition would lift jannock imaging revenues
to 50 mln dlrs this year. it did not specify arthurs-jones'
mark iv industries inc &lt;iv> 4th qtr feb 28 net
shr 30 cts vs 17 cts
revs 71.9 mln vs 25.2 mln
shr 1.20 dlrs vs 68 cts
revs 291.5 mln vs 83.0 mln
note: current periods include gain of 299,000 dlrs in qtr
and 1.2 mln dlrs in year from changes in pension accounting.
year-ago shr figures restated for 3-for-2 splits paid june
agreed to sell certain assets of the computer service sector of
its aabex service division to canadian general electric co ltd
terms were not disclosed. the closing date is expected to
salick health care inc &lt;shci.o> 2nd qtr net
shr 14 cts vs 10 cts
shr 29 cts vs 20 cts
laser photonics inc &lt;lazr.o> closes sale
completed a previously announced sale of 615,385 shares, or 18
pct, of its common stock to a group of investors for one mln
a 400,000 dlrs loan made by the investors was repaid out of
it also said it restructured its board to include three
members designated by the investors, including pierre
schoenheimer, roger kirk and leonard lichter.
amsouth bancorp &lt;aso> sets exchange ratio
issue about 3,166,000 shares of stock to acquire first
under a previously announced merger agreement, amsouth
offered 66 dlrs a share in amsouth stock for first tuskaloosa.
the company said first tuskaloosa shareholders will receive
1.978825 shares of amsouth stock for each first tuskaloosa
share held when the merger is effected april 17.
first tuskaloosa has assets of more than 425 mln dlrs.
amsouth's assets are about six billion dlrs.
voplex corp &lt;vot> 1st qtr mar 31
shr 25 cts vs 23 cts
revs 21.4 mln vs 20.1 mln
completed the acquisition of 85 pct of the seaxe energy corp's
&lt;seax.o> common stock for 182,415 shares of hadson's stock.
seaxe is engaged in international oil and gas exploration
and development primarily in the paris basin of france.
its merger with haba systems inc.
terms of the merger called for each share of arrays to be
exchange for a share of haba in a transaction valued at 4.1 mln
both companies produce and market microcomputer software.
mthly div 6.5 cts vs 6.5 cts prior
note: franklin massachusetts insured tax-free income fund.
mthly div 6.6 cts vs 6.6 cts prior
note: franklin minnesota insured tax-free income fund.
mthly div 7.1 cts vs 7.1 cts prior
note: franklin insured tax-free income fund.
mthly div 6.1 cts vs 6.1 cts prior
note: franklin ohio insured tax-free income fund.
franklin puerto rico sets monthly payout
mthly div 7.1 cts vs 7.1 cts prior
note: franklin puerto rico tax-free income fund.
mthly div 6.5 cts vs 6.5 cts prior
note: franklin california insured tax-free income fund.
dome petroleum ltd shares moved higher
in the u.s. and canada after transcanada pipelines ltd &lt;trp>
made a 4.3 billion canadian dlr bid for dome and dome said it
is in talks with two other unidentified companies.
market speculation is that the other two potential bidders
are not canadian companies and dupont's &lt;dd> conoco and
atlantic richfield co &lt;arc> are mentioned as possibilities,
wilf gobert of peters and co ltd said.
dome rose 1/4 to 1-1/8 on the american stock exchange.
transcanada pipelines was down 1/4 at 15-3/4 on the new york
dome was the most active stock on the toronto exchange at
1.50 dlrs per share, up 37 cts.
gobert characterized the market action in dome as "awfully
optimistic" but said investors are hoping for a competing offer
transcanada pipelines' offer is to dome management, not to
shareholders. however, it proposes issuing new equity in a
subsidiary that would operate dome assets. current dome
shareholders would own 20 pct of the new subsidiary.
united telecommunications inc &lt;ut> 1st qtr net
shr 13 cts vs 47 cts
revs 720.2 mln vs 793.6 mln
note: per-share results reflect payment of preferred
first pennsylvania corp &lt;fpa> 1st qtr net
shr 15 cts vs 13 cts
avg shrs 32.6 mln vs 23.2 mln
note: includes gains of 4.1 mln dlrs or 12 cts vs 3.3 mln
dlrs or 15 cts from tax loss carryforwards.
&lt;clark copy international> buys w. german stake
international corp said it acquired a majority interest in
datagraph gmbh of lich, west germany.
the acquisition was made through clark copy's majority
owned subsidiary interactive computer aids of norway.
no price was disclosed for the acquisition.
clark copy said worldwide sales for datagraph, which makes
color graphics workstations, were 10 mln dlrs for the year
entre computer centers inc&lt;etre.o> 2nd qtr loss
shr loss 29 cts vs profit 10 cts
net loss 2,733,000 vs profit 911,000
revs 21.5 mln vs 18.5 mln
shr loss 23 cts vs profit 26 cts
net loss 2,154,000 vs profit 2,445,000
revs 37.8 mln vs 37.7 mln
gte &lt;gte> cites loss of sprint
gte corp said the decline in its
first quarter net income reflects a 121 mln dlr loss from its
50 pct share ownership of u.s. sprint's operations.
this loss is an increase from the 60 mln dlrs loss reported
on operations gte owned a year ago quarter and prior to
entering a joint venture with united telecommunications &lt;ut> in
july 1986. under the joint venture, each company owns 50 pct of
earlier, the company reported net income declined to 265.0
mln dlrs from 283.0 mln dlrs in the first quarter a year ago.
theodore brophy, chairman of gte said, "we expect us
sprint's losses to diminish later this year as customer traffic
migrates to the new fiber-optic network for long distance
the reason for the higher losses reflect lower prices as
well as higher operating costs related, in part, to the
operating income of its telephone operations, which account
for 91 pct of the total, rose eight pct to 736.0 mln dlrs.
revenues from telephone operations rose eight pct to 2.9
goodyear tire and rubber co said it
expects to sell its celeron corp oil and gas subsidiary for
about two billion dlrs in about two months.
after the company's annual meeting, rober mercer,
goodyear's chairman and chief executive officer, also said
goodyear expects to report a profit of more than one dlr a
share from continuing operations in the first quarter. in the
same year-ago period, goodyear reported a loss of 64 cents a
mercer said about seven companies are interested in buying
celeron and they may form a consortium to buy the unit.
celeron consists of oil and gas reserves and an almost
complete pipeline linking drilling operations in santa barbara,
calif., to texas refineries. mercer said celeron's reserves
would not be sold separately from the pipeline.
concerning speculation that two billion dlr price tag for
celeron was too high, mercer said "there is no fire sale going
on here and we can continue to keep celeron as a profitable
mercer said the expected 1st quarter operating profit was
based on the new share total after goodyear's share repurchase
last year to fend off sir james goldsmith's hostile takeover
new england savings bank &lt;nesb> 1st qtr net
shr 44 cts vs not given
note: converted to stock ownership aug 1, 1986.
american national corp &lt;fnb> 1st qtr net
net 12.8 mln vs 12.2 mln
loans 2.8 billion vs 2.5 billion
deposits 3.2 billion vs 2.9 billion
assets 4.5 billion vs 3.8 billion
note: american national corp is a wholly-owned subsidiary
ab astra share split to widen foreign ownership
ab astra &lt;asts.st> said it was
proposing a two-for-one share split and the issue in june of a
new series of foreign-targeted shares with lower voting rights
as part of a strategy to internationalise the company.
the deal, which requires swedish government approval, will
raise the percentage of foreign voting rights allowed in the
medical group to 22.5 pct from 20 pct, astra said.
an extraordinary meeting of astra's board proposed the
creation of b free shares open to foreign buyers with one tenth
of a voting right per share. at present, astra stock consists
of one series of restricted shares and one of free shares.
net 17.7 mln vs 15.3 mln
note: &lt;national westminster bank plc> subsidiary.
loan loss provision 13.8 mln vs 13.0 mln
investment securities gains 2,003,000 dlrs vs 169,000 dlrs.
corrects name to subsidiary from parent.
the one bancorp &lt;tone> 1st qtr net
shr 76 cts vs 51 cts
note: includes gains of 1.3 mln dlrs vs 239,000 dlrs from
includes operations of bank of hartford, acquired feb 23.
year-ago shr figures reflect 2-for-1 split on april 15,
nor-quest &lt;nqrlf> makes bid for northair &lt;nrm.to>
inc said it will make a takeover offer to acquire all shares of
northair mines ltd on the basis of one nor-quest share plus one
dlr for two shares of northair.
nor-quest said it plans to bring northair's willa mine in
the nelson area of british columbia into production using
nor-quest's recently acquired 1200-ton per day mill located in
aristech &lt;ars> says 1st qtr shr estimate right
chief executive officer thomas marshall said analysts'
estimates of its 1987 fiscal year earnings of 2.25 dlrs to 2.50
dlrs per share are about right.
addressing a gathering of analysts and institutional
investors, marshall also said that analysts' estimates of its
first qtr earnings - 50 cts to 55 cts per share - were "in the
marshall said the full year estimates represent more than a
32 pct increase over 1986's fiscal year net of 1.70 dlrs per
he also said the first quarter estimates were 70 pct higher
than 1986's first quarter net of 29 cts per share.
marshall attributibuted the first quarter earnings growth to
several factors, including sustained demand in aristech's major
domestic markets and continued growth in exports.
aristech plans to spend approximately 200 mln dlrs over in
capital investments over the next three years, marshall added.
united telecom &lt;ut> reports us sprint loss
said its lower first quarter earnings included a loss of
63,055,000 dlrs from its equity in us sprint.
us sprint was formed july 1, 1986, as a partnership which
combined united telecommunications' long distance voice and
data operations with those of gte corp &lt;gte>.
earnings of 12.6 mln dlrs, or 13 cts a share compared to 46.4
mln dlrs, or 47 cts a share a year ago. revenues declined to
720.2 mln dlrs from 793.6 mln dlrs.
united telecommunications said the transition of us
sprint's nationwide fiberoptic network is proceeding ahead of
it said the transition to the fiber network from interim
networks would not only reduce operating costs in the second
half of 1987, but also assist in controlling unauthorized
canada approves u.s. gas exports by progas
progas ltd was issued an export licence
to sell 10.3 billion cubic meters of natural gas to ocean state
power co of burrillville, rhode island, the federal energy
the sale, covering a 20 year period beginning may 1, 1989,
was previously recommended by the national energy board.
brand companies &lt;bran> sees first quarter loss
brand companies inc said it expects to
report a 1987 first quarter loss of 15 to 17 cts a share on
revenues of 20 to 22 mln dlrs.
in the 1986 first quarter, brand reported earnings of 21
cts on revenues of 28.5 mln dlrs.
no reason was given for the expected loss.
final quarterly results will be reported toward the end of
the month or the beginning of may, a company spokesman said.
u.s. february trade to be reported on new basis
trade figures to be reported tuesday by the commerce department
will be on a new basis reflecting more recent data, so avoiding
future revisions of the monthly figure, commerce officials
the overall january deficit of 14.8 billion dlrs will be
revised, but the february figure will be a final one, officials
previously, the initial monthly figure has had to be
revised in subsequent months because of the time lag between
the report and the compiling of final estimates on imports and
the reporting of the february trade data was delayed
several weeks to permit gathering latest figures on imports and
exports to give a clearer picture of the monthly trade balance.
diversified holding company, said it has acquired the &lt;robert
half and accountemps> franchises in new england, including four
offices in boston and eastern massachusetts and one office in
boothe said it previously announced the purchase of &lt;robert
half international inc> the franchisor of the robert half and
the company said the aggregate purchase price it paid for
robert half international and the franchises was about 59 mln
atlantic financial &lt;atlf.o> to acquire s and l
signed a definitive agreement to acquire &lt;centurion savings and
atlantic did not disclose the purchase price.
atlantic said it originally announced its intention to
acquire centurion, located in los angeles, on feb 23, 1987.
centurion has assets of 105 mln dlrs, atlantic said.
gaf &lt;gaf> seen raising borg-warner &lt;bor> bid
gaf corp, set on acquiring borg-warner
corp's valuable plastics business, is believed by analysts to
be preparing an increased offer for the chicago-based company.
yesterday, borg-warner said it agreed to be acquired for
4.23 billion dlrs by a company to be formed by merrill lynch
capital partners. merrill offered 48.50 dlrs cash per share for
89 pct of borg-warner's common stock, and a package of cash and
borg-warner stock rose 1-3/8 to 49-5/8.
"i think it's (the stock price) telling us gaf is coming in
with another bid," said one analyst, who values the company at
51 or 52 dlrs per share.
gaf has offered 46 dlrs per share. it holds 19.9 pct of
"you're in a cat and mouse game on how you're going to up
the price. obviously, nobody wants to pay more than you have
to. i think gaf is looking at the company the way we're looking
at it - that it's worth more," pershing and co analyst richard
henderson estimated it is worth abouth 55 dlrs per share.
gaf has only said it was reviewing the situation. merrill
lynch officials did not return phone calls.
analysts have said they believe gaf chairman samuel heyman
sought borg-warner because of its chemicals and plastics
business. the rigid plastics are used in such things as
"where the heck can you buy a world class chemical
"he's (heyman's) got the bucks. he's a heavy hitter, and he
does not like to get pushed around," said henderson.
gaf, a roofing and chemicals concern, attempted a takeover
of the much larger union carbide corp two years ago. while gaf
did not win the company, it made a substantial gain on its
analysts said gaf already has a large profit built into its
borg-warner holdings. they said even if gaf raises its offer
and does not succeed, a higher bid from another company would
give gaf millions of dollars in profits on its stock.
"it's a win-win situation," said one analyst.
one analyst speculated an offer from gaf would be
"i think we are finally down to the final paragraph in this
borg-warner's other businesses include automotive parts,
protective services, which includes wells fargo security
guards, and chilton corp, a credit rating service.
charles rose, an oppenheimer and co analyst who follows
gaf, said if gaf were to sell into the merrill lynch offer, it
would realize about 125 mln dlrs net profit, or about 3.50 per
"i think there's a probability he goes up in price," said
rose said, however, he could not really predict what heyman
would do. "sam's a low-risk, high-return player."
"is he trying to build a major industrial chemical
enterprise, or is he trying to be an investment bank," rose
analysts said borg-warner's chemical business would add
earnings momentum to gaf. "i worked out that paying as much as
50 dlrs per share would still be additive to gaf in time, if
they sold off most of the non-chemical facilities," said john
borg-warner's chemical and plastics business provided 1986
operating profits of 153.3 mln dlrs on revenues of 1.04 billion
dlrs. total operating profits were 349.7 mln dlrs, and net
earnings were 206.3 mln dlrs for 1986.
"the borg chemical business is great," said rose, adding
its only u.s. competitors are monsanto co &lt;mct> and dow
pueblo international inc &lt;pii> sets payout
qtly div five cts vs five cts prior
swift &lt;sftpf> to sell south dakota pork plant
swift independent packing co said it
agreed in principle to sell its huron, south dakota pork plant
to huron dressed beef, for undisclosed terms.
completion of the proposed transaction is subject to
huron's ability to hire an experienced work force at
competitive rates, and receive government approval of the
purchase and operation of the plant, swift said.
&lt;gen term corp> acquires private firm
gen term corp said it entered
into escrow for the 5.2 mln dlr purchase of lewis-westco and
co, a privately-held bottler and distributor of wines and
lewis-westco had sales of more than 45 mln dlrs for its
fiscal year ended june 30, gen term also said.
separately, gen term, which trades over-the-counter, said
it plans to apply for nasdaq listing after it completes the
&lt;c and r clothiers inc> jan 31 year net
shr 1.46 dlrs vs 66 cts
sales 62.1 mln vs 57.2 mln
ccx network &lt;ccxn> to make acquisition
ccx network inc said it has
entered into a letter of intent to acquire privately-held
&lt;modern mailers inc> and its affiliate &lt;anwalt inc> for about
the company said modern mailers had revenues of 8,600,000
dlrs for the year ended october 31 and provides computer
service, computer printing and lettershop facilities.
u.s. corn exports seen well ahead of last year
today's weekly u.s. corn export inspection figure to be well
above last year, with wheat slightly better and soybeans about
corn export inspection guesses ranged from 40.0 to 44.0 mln
bushels for the week ended april 9, compared up 46.6 mln
inspected a week earlier and 15.2 mln in the year-ago week.
soybean export estimates ranged from 12.0 to 15.0 mln
bushels versus 10.8 mln exported last week and 13.2 mln last
export guesses for all wheat ranged from 16.0 to 20.0 mln
bushels, compared with 16.4 mln last week and 11.2 mln last
personal computer products &lt;pcpi.o> expects loss
inc said it expects to report a loss of about 195,000 dlrs in
its third quarter ended march 31, compared to a year ago loss
in the quarter of 169,000 dlrs.
it said revenues in the quarter are expected to be about
1,200,000 dlrs, compared to 564,000 dlrs a year earlier.
for the nine months ended march 31, personal computer
expects a net loss of about 325,000 dlrs, compared to a loss of
584,000 dlrs the previous year. revenues in the nine months are
expected to be about 3,880,000 dlrs, compared to 1,828,000 a
year ago. the company said it will report its earnings soon.
great northern nekoosa first qtr shr 1.59 dlrs vs 54 cts
great northern nekoosa first qtr shr 1.59 dlrs vs 54 cts
gander &lt;gndr.o> buys western wear retailer
acquired the privately held western ranchman outfitters, a
catalog and point-of-purchase retailer of western apparel based
it said western ranchman had sales for the year ended jan
31, 1987 of about 2.2 mln dlrs.
the purchase was made for an undisclosed amount of cast.
great northern nekoosa &lt;gnn> 1st qtr net
shr 1.59 dlrs vs 54 cts
net 43.3 mln vs 13.9 mln
revs 566.7 mln vs 487.8 mln
avg shrs 27.2 mln vs 25.9 mln
note: 1986 figures restated for adoption of financial
accounting standards board statement 87 "employer's accounting
net 1986 and 1987 includes 900,000 dlrs of investment tax
credits in 1987, and 3.1 mln dlrs in 1986.
american health properties inc &lt;ahe> 1st qtr
note: company began operating on february 20, 1987.
wells fargo and co 1st qtr shr 1.36 dlrs vs 1.13 dlrs
wells fargo and co 1st qtr shr 1.36 dlrs vs 1.13 dlrs
wells fargo and co &lt;wfc> 1st qtr net
shr 1.36 dlrs vs 1.13 dlrs
net 78.3 mln vs 51.6 mln
loans 35.89 billion vs 24.66 billion
deposits 31.71 billion vs 19.64 billion
assets 43.98 billion vs 28.60 billion
comerica inc &lt;cmca.o> 1st qtr net
shr 1.78 dlrs vs 1.12 dlrs
shr diluted 1.72 dlrs vs 1.08 dlrs
loans 843.4 mln vs 727.5 mln
deposits 8.30 billion vs 7.82 billion
assets 9.89 billion vs 9.27 billion
note: per-share results reflect payment of preferred
champion products &lt;ch> sets pay date for split
two-for-one stock split it declared february 26 will be payable
april 24 to shareholders of record april one.
spearhead industries inc &lt;sprh.o> 3rd qtr net
shr 22 cts vs 30 cts
sales 8.4 mln vs nine mln
shr 69 cts vs 63 cts
sales 23.6 mln vs 21.3 mln
kdi corp &lt;kdi> 1st qtr march 31
shr 18 cts vs six cts
revs 68.7 mln vs 63.5 mln
rj nabisco's &lt;rjr> unit sells cigar business
reynolds tobacco usa unit said it reached a definitive
agreement to sell winchester little cigar business to tobacco
exporters international usa ltd of atlanta, the u.s. subsidiary
last week, rj reynolds announced the sale of four smoking
tobacco brands. these brands and winchester represent less than
one pct of rj reynolds tobacco usa's total sales, which were
reynolds said the sale is expected to be completed on april
the company said it planned to concentrate its resources on
the manufacture and sale of cigarettes.
reynolds said that winchester, introduced in 1971, was a
dominant brand in the little cigar market.
software services of america inc &lt;ssoa.o> net
shr profit 14 cts vs loss four cts
net profit 311,994 vs loss 66,858
shr profit 51 cts vs profit two cts
net profit 1,126,673 vs profit 42,718
gander mountain &lt;gndr.o> buys western wear firm
acquired privately held western ranchman outfitters, a
cheyenne, wyo., retailer and catalog seller of western apparel.
western ranchman had sales of about 2.2 mln dlrs for the
year ended jan 31, 1987, the company said.
gander mountain sells brand name hunting, fishing and
ec meat directive deadline seen flexible
u.s. officials said they held out
little hope the european community, ec, would withdraw a
controversial meat inspection requirement, due to go into
effect april 30 and which u.s. meat producers claim will cut
but the officials said they expect the ec to allow u.s.
plants to continue shipping meat through the end of the year
provided they submit a plant improvement program with the u.s.
the ec's so-called third country meat directive will
require foreign meat processing plants to comply fully with ec
the u.s. meat industry has prepared a petition requesting
the reagan administration to retaliate against the ec rule.
at issue are u.s. meat exports to the ec valued at 132 mln
the ec rule would require all u.s. plants to make changes
in their inspection methods, ranging from veterinary staffing
last december, the ec determined that only one u.s. cattle,
one hog and one sheep slaughtering facility could be approved
without further review. usda would have to certify that the
all remaining plants with a history or potential of
shipping to the ec -- totaling nearly 400 -- would require more
significant changes in plant constructions or procedures before
robert hibbert, general counsel for the american meat
institute, said the meat industry expected to submit a formal
trade retaliation petition by april 30.
an interagency committee is reviewing the industry's draft
an official at the u.s. trade representative's office said
u.s. officials continued to press the ec to withdraw the rule,
but that "the chances of that are not too good at this time."
however, there is the "expectation" in u.s. government and
meat industry circles that the ec will continue to allow
shipments, at least through the end of the calendar year, from
u.s. plants that submit to usda a plan on how they will bring
their operations into conformity with the ec regulation, the
u.s. banks likely to lift prime rates again soon
major u.s. banks may lift prime
lending rates again within days due to recent increases in
their borrowing costs and speculation the federal reserve is
nudging up interest rates to help the dollar, economists said.
in what was the first prime rate boost since mid-1984, most
banks in early april lifted their rates a quarter point to
7-3/4 pct, citing a reduced gap between the prime and their own
cost of money. that spread has narrowed again.
"a prime rate increase could happen as soon as tonight,"
said robert brusca of nikko securities co international inc.
brusca said a quarter-point prime rate rise to eight pct is
justified because the spread between banks' cost of funds and
the prime rate has narrowed to less than three quarters of a
he said that spread had averaged around 1.4 percentage
points since last october until it fell below one point and
triggered the april prime rate rise at most banks.
"we could easily have another prime rate increase as soon
as this week," said david jones of aubrey g. lanston and co.
"we've got a fairly good chance of a prime rate rise in the
near future," said allan leslie of discount corp.
"based on the spread between the prime rate and funding
costs, you would ordinarily see a prime rate increase now,"
said harold nathan, economist at wells fargo bank.
however, he said banks may be reluctant to lift the prime
because that would dampen already fairly weak business loan
demand and because some are not sure the fed will maintain
recent upward pressure on money market interest rates.
nathan believes the fed has let market pressures lift
short-term rates in recent days to help the ailing dollar. he
said "if there is widespread belief money market rates will
stay high, a prime rate rise could occur at any time."
fed officials have long expressed concern that too steep a
dollar drop could help rekindle u.s. inflation. as the dollar
fell to a 40-year low against the yen friday, currency traders
said the fed and other central banks supported the dollar.
in addition to buying dollars outright, another way to
stabilize the u.s. currency would be for the fed to push u.s.
interest rates higher relative to overseas rates.
based particularly on the fed's reserve management actions
on friday and today, nathan of wells fargo said "it has become
clear that the fed is not fully resisting upward rate pressure
in the market. it is supplying fewer reserves than are needed."
bank funding costs and other short and long-term interest
rates rose sharply friday and today on heightened speculation
that the fed is gently firming monetary policy.
that was because the fed supplied far fewer reserves in the
market than most economists had expected.
on friday, the fed added reserves indirectly and in small
amounts via one billion dlrs of customer repurchase agreements
with the federal funds rate at which banks lend to one another
high at 6-5/16 pct. with funds trading even higher at 6-1/2 pct
today, the fed arranged only a slightly larger 1.5 billion dlr
"the fed's actions on friday and today show that it is
offering only token resistance to upward funds rate pressures,"
"the fed is focusing its policy attention mainly on the
need to defend the dollar," jones said. he believes it is
merely shading policy toward restraint now, "but to have a
major impact on the dollar, the fed will have to tighten policy
jones expects the fed to foster higher market rates by
becoming more restrictive in supplying reserves and, within
four to six weeks, to raise its discount rate from 5-1/2 pct.
jones said a u.s. discount rate increase to six pct might
well be accompanied by west german and japanese rate cuts to
given likely fed policy firming, he said both the yield on
30-year treasury bonds (about 8.30 pct now) and the prime rate
may be at 8-1/2 pct at end-june and nine pct by year's end.
"the jury is still out on whether the fed is tightening
policy to defend the dollar," said leslie of discount corp. he
said tax-date pressures have been pushing up fed funds lately.
leslie said fed actions and reserve data once these pressures
abate will show whether or not it is firming policy.
health and rehabilitation &lt;hrp> sets first divi
properties trust said it declared its initial dividend of 55
cts per share for the quarter ending march 31, 1987.
the dividend is payable may 20 to shareholders of record
the dividend includes five cts attributable to the period
between dec 23 and 31, 1986, and 50 cts attributable to the
first quarter of 1987, ending march 31, 1987.
utah power and light co &lt;utp> 1st qtr net
shr 46 cts vs 58 cts
net 29.0 mln vs 37.9 mln
revs 251.2 mln vs 254.2 mln
avg shrs 57.9 mln vs 56.0 mln
shr 1.36 dlrs vs 2.37 dlrs
net 93.7 mln vs 152.3 mln
revs 981.9 mln vs 1.03 billion
avg shrs 57.2 mln vs 55.3 mln
note: 1987 12 mth net includes 43.7 mln dlr charge due to
december 1986 provision for coal mining operations refund.
ericsson &lt;ericy.o> to buy rest of spanish unit
l.m. ericsson of sweden said it agreed
in principle to buy the 49 pct of intelsa, its spanish unit,
that it does not already own from &lt;telefonica>, spain's
terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
ericsson said intelsa, which controls about 40 pct of the
spanish telephone switch market, has 2,400 employees and annual
sales of 800 mln crowns, or 117 mln dlrs.
"the purchase will not affect the close working
relationship between telefonica and intelsa," ericsson said.
computrac &lt;llb> sees lower first quarter net
computrac inc said it expects first
quarter earnings to be down 50 to 60 pct from a year ago.
in last year's first quarter ended april 30, computrac
earned 379,000 dlrs on revenues of 2.4 mln dlrs.
the company said sales commitments on hand are about 50 pct
above those of a year ago, but system sales revenues are
recognized at shipment, and only 30 to 40 pct of sales
commitments in hand will ship during the period.
it said its outlook for the year remains unchanged.
nova &lt;nva.a.to> not planning dome &lt;dmp> bid
nova, an alberta corp, chief executive
robert blair expressed hope that dome petroleum ltd &lt;dmp>
remains under canadian ownership, but added that his company
plans no bid of its own for debt-troubled dome.
"we've no plan to bid," blair told reporters after a speech
to a business group, although he stressed that nova and 57
pct-owned husky oil ltd &lt;hyo> were interested in dome's
"but being interested can sometimes be different from
transcanada pipelines ltd &lt;trp> yesterday bid 4.30 billion
dlrs for dome, but dome said it was discontinuing talks with
transcanada and was considering a proposal from another company
and was also talking with another possible buyer, both rumored
asked by reporters if dome should remain in canadian hands,
blair replied, "yes. i think that we still need to be building
as much canadian position in this industry as we can and i
think it would be best if dome ends up in the hands of canadian
he said he did not know who other possible bidders were.
blair said that any move to put dome's financial house in
order "will remove one of the general problems of attitude that
have hung over western canadian industry."
he added, however, that the energy industry still faced "a
couple of tough, tough additional years."
asked about nova's 1987 prospects, blair predicted that
nova's net profit would rise this year to more than 150 mln
dlrs from last year's net profit of 100.2 mln dlrs due to
improved product prices and continued cost-cutting.
exxon &lt;xon> extends mid-grade unleaded marketing
exxon co u.s.a. said it is expanding
marketing of its mid-grade unleaded gasoline along the u.s.
the exxon corp subsidiary said the changeover to the
89-octane unleaded fuel will begin late this month and early
next in major markets in virginia, maryland, florida, and the
district of columbia. the product was introduced in new york,
new jersey, delaware, connecticut, rhode island, massachusetts,
new hampshire and the philadelphia area late last year.
&lt;first montauk securities> in merger deal
said it has reached a preliminary merger agreement with
the company said mcc shareholders would have a 25 pct stake
in the combined company and would receive a cash distribution
of about 35 cts per share.
barnett banks of florida inc &lt;bbf> 1st qtr net
shr 82 cts vs 72 cts
net 44.6 mln vs 38.9 mln
avg shrs 54.3 mln vs 52.8 mln
golden west financial corp &lt;gdw> 1st qtr net
shr 1.35 dlrs vs 1.53 dlrs
loans 10.26 billion vs 9.97 billion
deposits 7.65 billion vs 7.63 billion
assets 11.84 billion vs 12.00 billion
note: current qtr figures include 3.3 mln dlr charge
resulting from penalties for prepayment of fhlb borrowings.
honeywell inc &lt;hon> 1st qtr oper net
oper shr 96 cts vs 79 cts
oper net 43.7 mln vs 36.4 mln
sales 1.48 billion vs 1.15 billion
note: 1987 sales includes operations of sperry aerospace.
1986 operating net excludes a charge from discontinued
operations of 10.2 mln dlrs or 22 cts a share.
five to 10 mln dlr suit against a browning-ferris industries
inc &lt;bfi> unit, cecos international inc, caused the stock to
the stock has fallen 2-1/4 to 56-1/8 so far today, after
the news about the suit was released this morning.
"it's potentially a big suit and investors feel that its
not good to go against regulators," kenneth ch'u-k'ai leung, a
"what investors are actually saying by selling off some bfi
shares is the cloud over this industry is the threat that the
epa will get tough on waste management companies," willard
brown, senior analyst for first albany corp.
"investors are saying to themselves that waste management
companies have that kind of exposure to regulatory suits,"
brown said. brown said if the suit were settled for 10 mln dlrs
it would have an impact on browning ferris earnings.
leung said, however, that browning-ferris has adequate cash
reserves to cover the fine. "it would have no impact on
homestake &lt;hm> mulls buying ore reserves
acquiring more gold ore reserves in addition to the company's
exploration efforts, chief executive harry conger told reuters
"we are looking at more options to acquire more reserves
rather than just exploration," conger said adding, "the move to
consider acquisitions represents a change in the company's
conger said all of homestake's current cash position of 120
mln dlrs would be available to acquire reserves. in addition,
homestake has two lines of credit totaling 150 mln dlrs which
have not been drawn on today and could be used to finance an
conger said he anticipates 1987 exploration budget will be
about the same as 1986 spending of 27.3 mln dlrs. conger said
exploration for precious metals may be slightly higher than
last year's spending of 17.7 mln dlrs while oil and gas
exploration spending will be slightly less than last year's 9.6
conger said he sees homestake's 1987 gold production about
the same as 1986 gold production of 669,594 ounces.
however, 1987 first quarter production from its mclaughlin
reserve will be about 10 pct lower than last year's 45,400
ounces due to start-up production problems.
he said he believes gold prices will hold above the 400
u.s. dlr an ounce level for the rest of 1987.
in 1986, company earnings were based an average market
price for gold of 368 dlrs an ounce.
conger said a three pct change in gold prices represents a
12 cts a share impact on earnings but he declined to give a
specific forecast for 1987's first quarter, due to be released
in 10 days, or for full year 1987 results.
shr loss 95 cts vs loss nine cts
net loss 6,882,497 vs loss 513,153
revs 11.3 mln vs 10.0 mln
note: 1986 net includes 1,600,000 dlrs in increased
provisions for uncollectible receivables from affiliates, lower
recoverable value of inventories and writeoffs of capitalized
costs on discontinued projects, 1,700,000 dlr provision for
resolution of shareholder class action suit and gain 1,300,000
dlrs from repurchase of manufacturing equipment.
empire &lt;empa.to> to buy sobeys &lt;sysa.to> stock
empire co ltd said it will acquire all
shares of sobeys stores ltd it does not already own under an
arrangement approved by directors of both companies.
holders of sobeys class a non-voting shares and class b
common shares may elect to receive either 1.6 non-voting class
a empire shares or one non-voting class a empire share and
one-half of an eight pct redeemable retractable preferred
share. the preferred share has a par value of 25 dlrs and is
retractable at the holder's option on may 1, 1994.
